151
:	151
Jenofonte.:	Xenophon.
Anábasis:	Anabasis
admiraba:	admired
solamente:	only
apuntar:	aim
faltó:	short
siquiera.:	even.
modificado:	modified
viajaba:	was traveling
preciosas.:	precious.
alientan:	encourage
Responden:	Respondent
viajero:	traveler
Hechicero.:	Sorcerer.
venezolano—:	Venezuelan-
archivos:	files
fonográficamente:	phonographically
grabó:	recorded
shirishanas:	srishanas
descritos:	described
Autana.:	Autoana.
piaroa:	pair
fisonomía:	physiognomy
descubrieron:	discovered
franceses:	French
famosos:	famous
geográfica—:	geographic—
ubicación:	location
—aún:	-still
poblaciones:	populations
tumultuoso:	tumultuous
Brasil:	Brazil
viniéndose:	coming
ascensión:	rise
incipiente:	incipient
acceder:	access
Uarirén:	The Uariren
Capítulos:	Chapters
Sabana:	Sheet
trocado:	exchanged
gótica.:	gothic.
Muerto.:	Dead.
Raudal:	Torrent
paraje:	place
oculta.:	hidden
atracadero:	dock
Caño:	Spout
confluencia:	confluence
exactamente:	exactly
América:	America
descrito:	described
fotografiados:	photographed
precisas:	accurate
visiones:	visions
ciñe:	cinema
comunes:	common
integran:	integrate
prototipos:	prototypes
provincianas;:	provincial;
latinoamericana:	latin american
ubicación::	location:
NOTA:	USE
150
:	150
enero:	January
Corteza:	Crust
aclara:	clarify
ocre:	ocher
escamado:	flaky
próximas:	nearby
mueren:	they die
dulces:	sweets
algas:	started
rocosos:	rocky
espolones:	dewclaws
erizan:	bristle
sumergidas:	submerged
lajas:	slabs
Reaparecen:	They reappear
notablemente:	notably
descendido:	descended
Sísifo.:	Sisyphus.
vacaciones:	vacation
aguarda.:	wait.
Cómitre:	Committee
martillazos:	hammer blows
privado:	private
ensordecido:	deafened
seré:	I will be
Falta:	Lack
—oficio:	-job
sitúa:	situates
historia.:	history.
tangibles:	tangible
testimonios:	testimonials
representado:	represented
adelantarse:	get ahead
desligarse:	disengage
impedida:	prevented
difíciles.:	difficult.
amores:	loves
Romanticismo:	Romance
umbrosas:	shady
mansiones:	mansions
transcurre.:	passes.
ofrecen:	offer
época.:	era.
mienten:	they lie
ignorarse:	ignore
ardidos:	burning
Navegaré:	I will sail
Manatí.:	Manatee.
embarcar:	embark
pasaje:	passage
fui.:	I went.
cenizas:	ashes
devolvió:	returned
trunco—:	trunk
torcido:	crooked
enderezar:	straighten
neumas.:	I don't know.
ordenación:	ordering
lista:	list
contrapuntista:	contrapuntist
exigua:	little
realidades:	realities
Oficios:	Offices
Inventores:	Inventors
convivencia:	coexistence
recóndita:	hidden
pasé:	happens
edades;:	ages;
viajado:	traveled
actuando:	acting
trabada:	stuck
légamo:	let's go
forjan:	forge
costumbres:	traditions
abrigar:	shelter
conversión:	conversion
zozobras:	anxiety
esfuerza:	strive
Apocalipsis.:	Apocalypse.
hacedores:	doers
Prefieren:	They prefer
otra.:	other.
llevadera:	bearable
intelectual;:	intellectual;
convicción:	conviction
explicados.:	explained.
vividos:	lived
mundos:	worlds
alguna.:	some.
febrilmente:	feverishly
Recuerdo:	Memory
Detenido.:	Arrested.
Tiempo:	Time
Visitador:	Visitor
prestado.:	provided.
Fui:	I went
creído:	believed
agobiadora:	overwhelming
varón...»:	male..."
Naturaleza:	Nature
149
:	149
marido.:	husband.
Mujer:	Women
compasión::	compassion:
implorante:	imploring
Sacado:	Taken
destruirlo.:	destroy it.
compareciendo:	appearing
apelación:	appeal
justificarse:	justify
externas:	external
razones:	reasons
adquiridos:	acquired
derechos:	rights
balbuciente.:	stammering
protesta:	protest
intenta:	try
lacerado:	lacerated
gime:	moans
ordenara.:	would order.
echaría:	would throw
movería:	would move
horruras:	horrors
aliento:	breath
recupero:	recovery
desgarradas.:	torn.
toses:	you cough
derramo:	i spill
Lleno:	Full
quemadura.:	burn.
dentro.:	within.
alfileres:	pins
eriza:	hedgehog
ensordecido.:	deafened
Quedo:	I stay
recién...»:	newly..."
griego—.:	Greek-.
«Mujer:	"Women
hace.:	does.
diga:	say
hable:	speak
Agarro:	Grab
fusil.»:	gun."
matarme:	kill me
trabajar::	work:
sacan;:	they take out;
estúpida;:	stupid;
Gente:	People
idiota:	idiot
«Gente:	"People
desconocida:	unknown
viniendo:	coming
sospechado::	suspected:
recogió:	picked up
confidencias:	confidences
finge:	pretends
interesarme:	be interested
Adelantado;:	Advanced;
conocí:	I met
hermano:	brother
aparatosamente:	spectacularly
explotación.:	exploitation.
ofrezco:	I offer
buscarme:	look for me
dejará:	will leave
codicia—.:	greed-.
—cosa:	-What
aguardaré:	wait
dilación::	delay:
resigno:	I resign
Despechado:	Dismissed
escuchen.:	listen.
temiendo:	fearing
piensa:	think
dialogar:	dialogue
zarpar:	set sail
Manatí:	Manatee
avisa:	newspaper
salgamos:	let's go out
difiera:	differ
suplico:	I beg
responde—.:	responds.
«Sí:	"Yeah
preocupa.:	worries.
imponerle:	impose
interesa.:	interest
mapa.:	map.
encontrado.:	found.
tropiece:	tropie
obsesionante:	haunting
denuncio:	complaint
descubrimiento;:	discovery;
desasosegado:	uneasy
Utre.:	Tomorrow
alucinado:	hallucinated
buscados:	wanted
tesoros:	treasures
renuncian:	resign
sesos:	brains
trastornado:	deranged
kilates:	cheilitis
grandes.»:	big.”
ahogada—.:	drowned.
confía:	trust
catorce:	fourteen
«Diamantes:	«Diamonds
portentoso.:	portentous.
hundió:	sank
busca.:	search.
centinelas:	sentinels
ahumado.:	smoked.
148
:	148
vidrio:	glass
cristalitos:	crystallites
comprimidos:	pills
tubo:	profit
lámpara:	lamp
asegura:	assures
habitación.:	room.
ruega:	beg
conspirador:	conspirator
hacía.:	toward.
detenerse:	stop
vacila:	hesitate
atropella:	runs over
hilvanada.:	in the hilvana.
nervioso:	highly strung
nada.:	nothing.
desconfiados:	suspicious
inquietos:	restless
penetrante:	penetrating
griego::	Greek:
rasgos:	traits
cambiado:	changed
semanas.:	weeks.
incisión.:	incision.
penetramos:	we penetrate
anegado;:	waterlogged;
interesa::	interest:
afectuosa:	affectionate
tónica:	tonic
andanzas:	wanderings
halagador:	flattering
avellanado.:	countersunk.
escapara:	will escape
temiera:	feared
agarro:	grab
camisa.:	shirt.
envolviéndome:	involving me
conozco:	know
pegar.:	to take.
retuerzo:	twist
broma:	joke
necia:	foolish
exclamación:	exclamation
brutalidad:	brutality
doblándome:	bending
espinazo:	spine
afinca:	affina
rodilla:	knee
vigorosas:	vigorous
calleja:	quiet
llego:	arrive
reproducción.:	reproduction.
ritos:	rites
Alianza:	Alliance
resignadamente:	resignedly
importunar:	pester
escudillas:	bowls
lamen:	hand
escuchan:	they listen
taburetes:	stools
acuestan:	they lie down
inconfundible.:	unmistakable.
determinada:	determined
idéntico:	identical
Sur.:	On.
sobrecogiera:	would overwhelm
sistemáticas:	systematic
grabaciones:	recordings
Descubiertas:	Discovered
jaurías.:	packs
perro-chamán:	shaman-dog
misterioso:	mysterious
más—:	further-
—nunca:	-never
invariablemente:	invariably
duración:	duration
observado:	observed
rocas:	rocks
esucho:	Written by S.
cántico:	chant
entonan:	they intone
picado:	chopped
agudo:	sharp
diapasón:	diapason
ladra:	thief
mandato:	mandate
apaga:	turn off
invertido:	invested
ruidos:	noises
relevo:	relief
espesuras:	thickets
posaran.:	they will put
manzana:	apple
acariciable:	caressable
mutación:	mutation
volumen:	volume
intermitencias:	intermittencies
adelgaza:	lose weight
hincha:	fan
conservando:	preserving
esculturas:	sculptures
aislado:	isolated
tragantes:	swallowers
estremecidas:	trembling
viaje—.:	journey-.
proseguir:	pursue
—preocupado:	—concerned
esfuerzos:	efforts
aguzado:	sharpened
crítico:	critical
147
:	147
tediosa.:	tedious
seria:	he would be
lentitud:	slowness
transcurren:	pass
Simón.:	Simon.
invitaciones:	invitations
tentadoras:	tempting
desoyendo:	ignoring
permanezco:	I remain
simientes:	seeds
urgido:	urged
abrigo:	shelter
«También:	"Also
guía.:	guide.
regresará»:	will return"
regresará...:	will return...
promueve:	promotes
útiles:	useful
Dicen:	They say
inmovilizado:	immobilized
ratos:	rats
sacándome:	taking me out
Titán:	Titan
irregulares—:	irregular—
estrofas:	stanzas
Voces:	You
ocupo:	I occupy
magníficamente:	magnificently
quitado:	taken
carácter:	character
arrumbado:	tidy
zumbantes:	buzzing
espesan:	thicken
llenando:	filling
angustia.:	distress.
semblante...:	countenance...
mudado:	changed
informadores:	informants
trastocados:	upset
serlo:	be
andado:	walked
desandar:	unravel
comete:	commit
demás—.:	others.
negado:	denied
—dueño:	-owner
proponga:	propose
hazaña:	feat
repetir:	repeat
privilegios:	privileges
envanecido:	conceited
repartido:	distributed
trillado:	trite
vivirlo::	live it:
inconscientemente:	unconsciously
excepcionales:	exceptional
entender:	to understand
Buscando:	Searching
aleja.:	move away
adormecida.:	asleep.
darían:	would give
advertida:	warned
misteriosamente:	mysteriously
secuestrado:	kidnapped
sospechar:	suspect
Neolítico:	Neolithic
vuelo.:	flight.
expresarme:	express myself
faltaban:	were missing
audífonos:	earphones
146
:	146
Mandatarios:	Representatives
despachado:	dispatched
regresar.:	go back.
tentación:	temptation
decisiva::	decisive:
sometido:	lost
terrores:	terrors
apelación.:	appeal.
poniéndome:	putting me
podamos:	we can
demorando:	delaying
creciente.:	growing.
respeto»:	I respect"
«por:	"by
Riendo:	Laughing
entender.:	to understand.
Digo:	I say
desbordado:	overflowed
momentos.:	moments.
alcanzaban:	they reached
recordaba:	I remembered
algo.:	something.
descompuesto:	decomposed
volvemos:	we return
machetazos.:	machetes
afincarse:	settle
mide:	stomach
encontrarla::	find it:
podremos:	we can
mojarse:	get wet
vara:	be
apoyo:	support
hunde:	dogs
meterse:	get in
borda:	edge
caigo:	I fall
sentencioso:	sententious
«Posible:	"Possible
posible»:	possible"
idénticos:	identical
mansedumbre.:	meekness.
considerando:	considering
contratiempo.:	setback.
últimamente:	lately
marchado:	left
augurio.:	best wishes.
parecería:	it would seem
percance:	mishap
mañana.:	tomorrow.
tengamos:	we have
inverso:	reverse
remando:	rowing
lleno.:	full.
comenzamos:	we start
marca.:	mark.
hoias.:	hoya
dintel:	lintel
estrecha.:	narrow
jambas:	jambs
erguidos:	erected
Eran:	Were
fuerza.:	force.
advertirla:	warn her
valla:	municipality
seguimos:	we follow
troncos.:	trunks.
sigo:	I continue
ironía:	irony
imagino:	I imagine
navegado.:	navigated.
virar:	to turn
recordaría:	I would remember
espolón:	spur
Navegamos:	We sail
encontrarlas.:	find them.
habremos:	we will have
borra:	drill
existen:	there are
superpuestas.:	overlapping.
aparecido:	appeared
ninguno:	none
absurdo::	absurd:
mareo.:	dizziness.
iguales:	equal
afianzando:	strengthening
apartarla:	put it away
chistar.:	joke
indicaciones:	indications
segundos;:	seconds;
145
:	145
distraído:	distracted
cuenta;:	account;
darme:	give me
asaltan:	assault
tronco.:	stem.
fatigan:	exhausting
adelante.:	forward.
Seguimos:	We follow
interroga.:	question.
despacio:	slowly
infinito.:	infinite.
alargarse:	lengthen
verticalmente:	vertically
superpuestas:	overlapping
lenta:	level
acercamos:	we approach
señalo:	I point out
revueltas:	revolts
bochorno:	embarrassment
Culcán...:	Culcan...
emplumadas::	feathered:
triada:	triad
presididos:	chaired
lanzados:	launched
Guacamayos-
Bólidos:	Macaws-
Racing cars
Cóndores-Mensajeros:	Condors-Messengers
Pájaros-Soles:	Birds-Suns
Águila-Rocío:	Eagle-Dew
Pájaro-Trueno:	Thunder-Bird
majestades:	majesties
desfile:	parade
montañas—:	mountains-
mirarlos:	look at them
dibujados:	drawn
pintados:	painted
ornadas:	ornate
aquellas:	those
empinado:	prancing
graznar:	grazier
esquimales:	eskimos
Pájaro-Espíritu:	Spirit-Bird
Pájaro:	Bird
desempeñados:	performed
poniendo:	putting
omnipresencia:	omnipresence
concierto.:	concert.
alborotar:	disturb
bandada:	flock
triángulo:	triangle
aplausos.:	applause.
abofetean:	in the palm of your hand
plomizas:	leaden
aletas:	fins
erizando:	erizing
atropellan:	run over
chocan:	they collide
saltan:	they jump
cardumen:	shoal
oscurecido:	darkened
azufre.:	sulfur.
sacarlo:	take it out
enjambres:	swarms
pegar:	to take
bastaría:	would be enough
moverse:	move
apretadas:	tight
mariposas:	butterflies
miríadas:	myriads
revolotean:	they flutter
húmeda:	wet
estación:	season
llovido:	rained
anegado.:	waterlogged.
estuvo:	was
caudalosa:	mighty
crecida:	spate
podrida:	rotten
abrieron:	opened
levantaron:	they lifted
literalmente:	literally
reventado:	busted
apoderarse:	seize
Han:	He
abandonada.:	abandoned.
atracamos:	we dock
asomarse:	lean out
Acaba:	It's over
144
:	144
quiero.:	wanna.
afinco:	hard
servirlos—.:	serve them.
galeras:	guys
espaldero:	espalier
bogavante:	lobster
dilema::	dilemma:
Reino:	Kingdom
plantea:	poses
partes.:	parties.
Pruebas;:	Evidence;
consciente:	conscious
amanecidos.:	dawns.
albor:	dawn
macerar:	macerate
recogiendo:	picking
Rúbricas:	Rubrics
ostenta:	boasts
escapé:	exhaust
Sonrío:	I smile
dolorosos:	painful
embates:	clashes
duro:	stand
corto:	short
vellón:	fleece
pálpito:	palpito
sopesar:	balance
tiñe:	dyes
volverme:	come back
muslos;:	thighs;
cierne.:	hovers.
hablan:	they talk
Huyo:	That one
hago:	do
bolge.:	area.
Miedo:	Fear
miedo::	fear:
asalta:	assault
edición.:	edition.
imponga:	impose
buscar;:	look for;
canse:	get tired
alejarlo:	push it away
conjurarlo:	conjure it
superstición:	superstition
vaga:	vacancy
cumplir:	achieve
precaución:	caution
elección:	choice
umbrales:	thresholds
laberinto.:	maze.
abrió:	opened
romántico:	romantic
falso:	false
acierto:	success
zanjado:	ditched
agüero.:	omen.
tejen:	save
alivio.:	relief.
deliciosa:	delicious
Seguro:	Insurance
aldea...:	village...
siguiendo:	following
desprendo:	I detach
Llegado:	arrived
agarrara:	will grab
brújula:	compass
ramas.:	remaining.
abovedado:	vaulted
pasadizo:	anecdote
identificación:	ID
incisa:	engraved
Buscaré:	I will search
cordel:	string
trazada:	traced
muralla:	wall
—aquella:	-that
guiarlo:	guide him
comprometo:	I commit
contrafuertes:	buttresses
navegado:	navigated
seguiré:	I will continue
encontré:	I found
llevarme:	take me
143
:	143
mayores.:	older.
patronas:	cartridges
Inés:	Agnes
Otro:	Other
sembraba:	sowed
levantaba:	lifted
inexplorados:	unexplored
revela:	reveals
puestas.:	set.
bragas:	panties
barbudos:	bearded
Carpintero:	Carpenter
así»:	So"
caño.:	spout.
encontrara:	will find
dominios:	domains
hollar:	cases
pretendieron:	they intended
aviso:	Notice
hermanos:	siblings
tórax:	chest
respuestas:	answers
trueque.:	barter.
mercancías:	goods
navegados:	navigated
remontar:	reassemble
zapatero:	shoe
aindiado:	further
lento:	this
ataúdes:	coffins
medía:	average
carpintero:	carpenter
manatíes:	manatees
Pescador:	Fisherman
rato—.:	mouse-.
comensales:	diners
vasos:	vases
Pido:	I ask
cenizas.:	ashes
grisura:	torn
arrugada:	wrinkled
resplandeciente:	resplendent
rescoldo:	ember
sabiduría:	wisdom
ardorosa:	ardent
lumbre:	fire
desconocidas.:	unknown.
bellotas:	acorns
danta:	interest
pernil:	ham
chisporrotea:	sizzles
chimenea:	chimney
vainilla:	in vain
terrateniente.:	landowner.
poseedor:	holder
ello;:	it;
rezando:	praying
proclama:	proclamation
horcones:	forks
cobija:	blanket
tomarlo::	take it:
deslindes.:	demarcations.
cercados:	fenced
innato:	innate
mudar:	to change
estuario:	estuary
inmensas.:	immense.
transporte:	transport
precarios:	precarious
cultivado:	cultivated
sustos:	scares
enrolladas:	rolled up
largas:	long
echándose:	laying down
naturalidad:	naturalness
doce:	sweet
solteras:	single
compró:	bought
siglo.:	century.
medicinas:	medicines
aceites:	oils
pólvora:	gunpowder
latas:	cans
estantes:	bookshelves
rincones:	corners
rollos:	rolls
mixta:	mixed
comedor:	dining room
transformada:	transformed
catedral.:	cathedral.
tinaja:	jar
matas;:	fed;
142
:	142
cromos:	trading cards
cándido:	candid
alejándose:	moving away
correas:	straps
reventarles:	burst them
pesaran:	retirement
empila:	stacked
maletas:	suitcases
importancia.:	importance.
acercado:	approached
enorme:	huge
mecidas:	measures
tejado:	roof
sorpresa::	surprise:
guiaba:	guided
muchacho:	young guy
derrota:	defeat
vencido:	won
retarla:	challenge her
mismo::	same:
otorgarse:	be granted
mejillas.:	cheeks.
nariz:	nose
desfiguro:	disfigure
detener:	arrest
invocando:	invoking
morían:	they died
muertes:	deaths
causaron:	caused
cuerpo.:	body.
impuestas:	imposed
mutilaciones:	mutilations
sangrientas:	bloody
ablaciones:	ablations
Puedo:	Can
desmenuzado:	crumbled
escuadrado:	squared
castrado;:	castrated;
viejísimo:	very old
remembranza:	remembrance
arrancado:	torn off
pedernal:	flint
flacas:	skinny
costillas:	ribs
levantando:	lifting
flecharlo:	arrow it
desnudado:	stripped
aduanas:	customs
almacenes:	warehouses
caminando:	walking
seguí:	I continued
crucé:	crossing
amaneció:	it dawned
Incapaz:	Unable
dormidos.:	asleep
hospitales:	hospitals
funerarias:	funeral homes
desiertas:	deserted
lonjas:	markets
anduve:	I walked
regresaría:	I would return
huí:	I fled
vestí:	I dressed
advertencia.:	warning.
llegara:	will arrive
echada:	cast
Asunción:	Assumption
artículo—:	article-
—decía:	—he said
Petroglifos.:	Petroglyphs.
emprendido:	undertaken
entrecana.:	grey-haired
lucía:	lucia
tomada:	outlet
él.»:	he."
retrato:	portrait
conocimos;:	we met;
«Creo:	"Believe
barato:	AFFORDABLE
impreso:	printed
boletín:	bulletin
Abriendo:	Opening
verdadero.:	TRUE.
suscripción:	subscription
aceptado:	accepted
sorteando:	raffling
compartiera:	would share
monja:	only
religiosa:	religious
pequeña:	small
velador.:	pedestal table.
publicación:	publication
tomó:	took
141
:	141
favorables.:	favorable.
recobrado:	recovered
sintió:	felt
tomarse:	take
amenazadoramente:	threateningly
cerraba:	closed
asimilaba:	assimilated
cortada:	cut
espíritu::	spirit:
cobraba:	charged
tuviera—:	had—
personificándose:	personifying
conjunto:	set
Sagitario:	Sagittarius
consultas.:	consultations.
preferible:	preferable
pago:	pay
poseída:	possessed
prostituta:	prostitute
Cualquier:	Any
desprecio.:	contempt.
volvía:	came back
triste:	sad
envuelve.:	wraps
une:	a
definitiva:	definitive
sorpresas:	surprises
decepción:	disappointment
abstinencia:	abstinence
quiso:	wanted
accedí:	I agreed
manejó:	management
hábilmente:	skillfully
comprometería:	would compromise
afirmó:	stated
consecuencia;:	consequence;
privarme:	deprive myself
necio:	foolish
trató:	deal
holgadas:	baggy
ponerse:	put on
permiso:	permission
llenó:	full
terminadas.:	finished.
astrológicas:	astrological
consultas:	queries
temprano:	early
alevosía:	treachery
entereza:	fortitude
socavar:	undermine
arreglarse:	get ready
moderación.:	moderation.
miseria:	misery
crédito:	credit
seducción:	seduction
intentos:	attempts
frustrar:	frustrate
decidido:	decided
margarina;:	Margarine;
hedor:	stench
alumbrada:	lighting
compañía:	company
toleraba:	tolerated
abrazado:	embraced
verdaderos.:	true.
magnánimamente:	magnanimously
atribuyéndolo:	attributing it
enfermara:	nurse
echaba:	threw
rectamente—.:	uprightly-.
mentir:	lie
confianza:	trust
inocente:	innocent
Nicolás.:	Nicholas.
rojizo:	reddish
remozado:	renovated
lujuria.:	lust.
castigan:	punish
llagas:	sores
humores:	moods
siguientes:	following
arrepentimiento:	repentance
plegaria:	prayer
unía:	united
juntos:	together
reñido:	close
desamparo.:	helplessness.
cedería:	would give in
tocador:	dresser
revueltos:	scrambled
afeites:	you leave
percibir:	perceive
calados:	silent
cintas:	ribbons
cubrecama:	bedspread
rezaba:	prayed
amenazaba:	threatened
agarrarse:	hold
aterrorizada:	terrified
sufrimientos::	sufferings:
indecibles:	unspeakable
producía:	produced
desdoblamiento:	unfolding
140
:	140
impedirlo.:	prevent it.
luchaba:	fought
burdel:	brothel
condujera:	would drive
parecida:	similar
aquiescencia:	acquiescence
afirmada:	asserted
definido:	defined
escozor:	stinging
muslos:	thighs
conocida:	known
apesadumbra.:	sorrow
discutir.:	to discuss.
escucharla.:	listen to it.
hablarle.:	talk to him
fuera.:	out.
nueve:	nine
Siete:	Seven
haré:	I will
consulta:	consultation
«Si:	"And
libro.:	book.
cercano.:	nearby.
librarse.»:	get free."
circunstancias:	circumstances
vinculada:	linked
Psicoanálisis::	Psychoanalysis:
afecto.:	keen.
ningún:	none
desea:	want
perspectiva:	perspective
ocultas::	hidden:
Ciencias:	Sciences
posición.:	position.
Egipto::	Egypt:
«CÁRCEL.:	"JAIL.
sueños::	dreams:
hojear:	leaf through
librería:	bookshop
entro:	within
Carceri:	Prisons
di:	Of
Invenzioni:	Inventions
aguafuerte:	etching
colorido:	colorful
caballo.:	horse.
sonaba:	it sounded
frente.:	forehead.
desviación:	deviation
ligera:	light
lontananza:	distance
multiplicaban:	they multiplied
suplicio:	torture
mecían:	rocked
pilares:	pillars
prisión:	prison
soñé:	I dreamed
Anoche:	Last night
augurios:	omens
Busco:	I'm looking
prensa.:	press.
horóscopos:	horoscopes
excelente.:	excellent.
vitrina;:	showcase;
expuesta:	exposed
agüero:	omen
araña:	spider
presagios:	omens
imposibilidad:	impossibility
Abetos:	Fir trees
resuello.:	wheeze.
asomaba:	appeared
fogatas:	campfires
mojadas:	wet
leñas:	firewood
tacto:	touch
Algunas:	Some
aplacamiento.:	appeasement.
procura:	search
adormilan:	sleepy
otoño:	autumn
herrumbrosos:	rusty
conducen:	drive
caminatas:	walks
interminables:	endless
emprendo:	I undertake
encaja:	fits
viene.:	he comes.
Tarda:	Afternoon
suspende:	suspend
¡Ay:	Yes
alusiones::	allusions:
lacerantes:	tearing
cargarse:	load
tierna:	tender
encontrarme:	find me
amargura:	bitterness
fortuitos—.:	fortuitous.
asombrosa:	amazing
trastocaron:	disrupted
—día:	-day
casualidad:	chance
abriera:	would open
iniciales:	initials
estampan:	stamp
encuadernado:	bound
139
:	139
Servando:	Serving
maravilladas:	amazed
lecturas:	readings
anunciando:	advertising
moblaje:	furniture
paquete:	package
cazuela:	casserole
armarios.:	wardrobes.
cocinan:	they cook
fuman:	they smoke
agujereadas:	perforated
suelas:	soles
nieve:	snow
camisa:	shirt
lavan:	stage
acercando:	approaching
lanzado:	launched
masa:	time
cordeles:	twine
entretejen:	interweave
calles:	streets
ir.:	and
semana.:	week.
cobrarlos:	charge them
desgana:	reluctance
ejecuto:	I execute
instrumentación:	instrumentation
encargos:	charges
cuantía:	amount
necesito:	need
divorciado:	divorced
aspirantes:	aspirants
infructuosamente:	vainly
buscado:	sought
estudios.:	studies.
asistente:	assistant
antiguo:	ancient
publicitaria:	advertising
perdona:	sorry
derramadas.:	spilled.
margarinas:	margarine
alfombras:	rugs
Catorce:	Fourteen
estudiantes:	students
experto:	expert
advirtiendo:	warning
recibe:	receive
luminosos.:	luminous.
anuncios:	advertisements
aceras:	sidewalks
encontrándome:	finding me
firmar:	sign
firmo:	the company
secretarios:	secretaries
interrogo:	I ask
aguardo:	I wait
viajo:	I travel
esquinas:	corners
doblo:	doublo
eliminada:	eliminated
embrollo:	imbroglio
negaba—.:	he denied.
procedimiento:	procedure
amoralidad:	amorality
tornear:	turn
plenamente:	fully
darse:	give
sacrificando:	sacrificing
vacilado:	hesitated
santuario:	sanctuary
impuesta:	imposed
cotidiano:	everyday
torturara:	will torture
Secesión:	Secession
escenario:	scenery
vendimia.:	vintage.
viña:	came
edifica:	build
Escrituras:	Scriptures
despreciable:	negligible
gravidez.:	pregnancy.
indicio:	indication
explota:	explode
enredado:	tangled
simplificar:	simplify
alarma.:	alarm.
embarazo:	pregnancy
nación.:	nation.
jueces:	judges
herida:	wound
representando:	representing
empeñada:	pawned
carmín:	carmine
encarnizada:	fierce
difuminar:	blur
internacional:	International
vil:	will
Tuve:	Had
abominación.:	abomination.
transgresor:	offender
considerarme:	consider me
Pastores:	Shepherds
gastado:	spent
perdonaba:	forgave
instancia:	instance
trampa:	trap
tembloroso.:	trembling.
dobló:	folded
reportaje:	reportage
devueltas:	returned
138
:	138
octubre):	October)
cómitre.:	comitre
mazo:	the small
Hombre-Ninguno:	Man-None
Hombre-Avispa:	Wasp-Man
acepto:	I accept
intacto;:	intact;
nacido.:	born.
envejece:	gets old
cansa:	tired
contemplarlo;:	contemplate it;
futuro.:	future.
pretérito:	past tense
barajado:	shuffled
posibles—.:	possible—.
Icarias:	Ikarias
permitidas:	permitted
Utopías:	Utopias
porvenir:	future
acordándome:	remembering
lugar::	place:
componían:	they composed
limón:	lemon
recio:	tough
dividido.:	divided.
contado:	counted
laberinto:	maze
espacio.:	space.
lanzadas:	thrown
frases:	phrases
cornisas:	cornices
pregonados:	heralded
títulos:	titles
expuestas:	exposed
cubiertas:	covers
anuncia::	announces:
lugares—.:	places—.
muevan:	move
higos:	figs
caigan:	fall
Sello:	Seal
Sexto:	Sixth
apertura:	opening
devuelto:	returned
ocurrir.:	occur.
frutas:	fruits
simiente:	seed
publicidad;:	advertising;
tensos:	tense
interpelaciones:	interpellations
servidumbres;:	easements;
colectividad:	community
reprimenda:	reprimand
miedo.:	fear.
atajado:	shortcut
impulso:	impulse
rebeldía:	rebellion
apetencia:	appetite
destinos.:	destinations.
forjarse:	forge
propuesta:	proposal
máxima:	maximum
biblioteca.:	library.
yacían:	lay
profundo:	deep
esencias:	essences
fortuitos:	fortuitous
resueltos:	resolved
llevaban:	they carried
reflexiones:	reflections
Estas:	It is
creadores.:	creators.
imitando:	imitating
Occidente:	West
renovar:	renew
Querían:	they wanted
perseguida.:	persecuted.
cartesiano:	Cartesian
cogitante:	thinking
calificador:	qualifier
colocaban:	they placed
«bárbaras»:	«barbarians»
calificadas:	qualified
—
cosas:	—
things
cumplían:	they fulfilled
bárbaras:	barbarians
barbarie:	barbarism
Buscaban:	They were looking
Método:	Method
Discurso:	Speech
137
:	137
erizados:	bristling
fetiches:	fetishes
africanos:	Africans
blandían:	the mixture
risible:	laughable
resultaba:	it turned out
razón.:	reason.
debieran:	should
fervores:	fervor
savias:	swordfish
rejuvenecerse:	rejuvenate
cansada:	tired
primitivos—.:	primitives—.
batería:	battery
instintivas:	instinctive
energías:	energies
perdida:	lost
interrogaban:	they interrogated
enigmáticos:	enigmatic
vaciados:	emptied
difuntos:	deceased
exhiben:	exhibit
pintura:	paint
vitrina:	showcase
plazas:	places
bosta:	they will be
zócalos:	sockets
magistralmente:	masterfully
cubriendo:	covering
soñando:	ringing
apisonar—.:	अपिसोनार—.
comunica:	communicate
seda:	this
barreras:	barriers
contactos:	contacts
abrazos:	hugs
propiciando:	enabling
apagan:	turn off
rítmicos.:	rhythmic.
reducido:	reduced
movida:	moved
ingredientes:	ingredients
encajados:	embedded
intríngulis:	intrigued
rodea.:	surrounds
Reconocido:	Recognized
filtraciones.:	leaks.
bóveda:	vault
remeda:	remedy
raso:	satin
burgués»—.:	bourgeois"-.
«espíritu:	"spirit
reciente:	recent
fiel:	fell
—aunque:	-although
rancios:	stale
locura:	craziness
nada—:	nothing-
—muniqueses:	—muniques
rococós:	rococo
castillos:	castles
panorámicas:	panoramic
vistas:	views
Hornig:	Horny
cochero:	coachman
Baviera:	Bavaria
agrandadas:	enlarged
gruta:	cave
intermitentemente:	intermittently
rozados:	rubbed
giratorio:	rotary
montados:	mounted
móvil:	mobile
hipocampos:	hippocampi
iluminadas:	illuminated
grutas:	caves
trozos:	pieces
estuco:	stucco
montado:	mounted
estrado:	platform
astrágalo.:	astragalus.
vestidas:	dressed
clepsidra:	hourglass
metrónomo:	metronome
comido:	eaten
costillar:	rib
exangüe:	bloodless
Gorgona:	Gorgon
desollados:	skinned
desesperanza:	hopelessness
agobiados:	overwhelmed
pétreos:	stony
falos:	will fall
muletas:	crutches
ciclistas:	cyclists
bicicletas:	bicycles
osamentas:	bones
áridas:	arid
llanuras:	plains
escenografías:	scenery
sótano:	basement
divertirse:	enjoy
góticos.:	goths.
caracteres:	characters
luminosa:	bright
veníamos:	we came
próximo:	next
fatigados:	fatigued
desamparados:	helpless
fuguen:	the fugue
tampoco:	neither
fuerzas:	forces
repondrán:	will replenish
Vivieron:	They lived
nutricias.:	nutricies.
empresas:	companies
vendieron:	they sold
extenuados:	exhausted
ahogar:	drown
circundante:	surrounding
culturas:	cultures
retazos:	scraps
fachadas:	facades
136
:	136
encrespamiento:	inking
ocurrencia:	occurrence
estilo.:	style.
sustituirlos:	replace them
secarse:	dry up
Renacimiento:	Renaissance
acantos:	acanthus
ejecutados:	executed
clásicos:	classics
entablamentos:	entablatures
agonizantes:	dying
edificios:	buildings
enfermas:	sick
tenidas:	had
coagulada:	coagulated
pringoso:	catch
trofeo:	trophy
edades:	ages
ornamento:	ornament
aplicado:	applied
arquitecto:	architect
bucráneo:	bucranium
triglifos:	triglyphs
antiguo::	ancient:
asienta:	nods
implicaciones.:	implications.
luciferada:	luciferated
propiciatoria:	propitiatory
percusión:	percussion
reto:	challenge
alianza:	alliance
gaje:	grows
baño:	bathroom
enmascarado:	masked
purificación:	purification
desconozca::	don't know:
inscripciones:	registrations
tradiciones:	traditions
conservar:	keep
enjoyaron.:	they bejeweled
almendra:	almond
abeto:	fir
cubren:	cover
bautismo:	baptism
almendras:	almonds
llevan:	they carry
Epifanía:	Epiphany
Buscan:	They search
gestos.:	gestures.
simbólica:	symbolic
arroz:	rice
puñados:	handfuls
reciben:	receive
anillos:	rings
intercambian:	they exchange
casan:	feet
hacen.:	do.
asisten:	assistant
inconsciencia:	unconsciousness
advierto:	I warn
congregados:	congregants
percatarme:	notice
acompaña.:	accompanies
escucharse:	listen
hombres::	men:
mayoría:	most
ininteligibilidad:	unintelligibility
Dei:	Of the
atris:	black
—plantatus:	- planted
multiplicatur::	is multiplied:
Libani:	Lebanon
cedrus:	cedar
—
Sicut:	-
Like
florebit::	will bloom
gregoriano::	Gregorian:
muertas.:	dead
repleto:	full
foso:	pit
ensancha:	widens
fieles:	faithful
malentendido.:	misunderstanding.
escuelas:	schools
latín:	Latin
ajena.:	foreign
sacerdote.:	priest.
entiende:	understand
nocturno:	night
congregado:	congregated
cirios::	candles:
amarillor:	yellower
deambulatorio.:	ambulatory
resuenan:	resonate
profundos:	deep
invitan:	invite
ahumadas:	smoked
zapatos:	shoes
tiembla:	trembles
socavón:	sinkhole
comprada;:	purchased;
gabán:	overcoat
ladrillo:	brick
garita:	sentry box
avanzado:	advanced
hornacina:	niche
paradas.:	stops.
momias:	mummies
aturdidos:	stunned
soldadas:	welded
escaparates:	escapes
resguardados:	sheltered
espacios:	spaces
angostos:	narrow
Descubro:	I find out
prisa.:	hurry.
inválidos:	invalid
135
:	135
comercios:	shops
pegado:	glued
progresar:	to progress
ajustarme:	adjust
logro:	achievement
semáforo.:	traffic light.
semáforo:	traffic light
agitación:	agitation
restablece:	resets
reinante;:	reigning;
pulsación:	pulsation
constancia:	constancy
tranvía:	tram
cruzar:	cross
permite:	allows
encenderse:	light
esquina:	corner
corresponde:	corresponds
orgánicas.:	organic.
voluntades:	wills
acera:	pavement
descubrir:	discover
costumbre:	habit
adquirido:	acquired
tarde):	late)
(Más:	(Further
peldaños:	steps
escaleras.:	stairs.
bajé:	I went down
Cansado:	Tired
sí.:	Yeah.
levantó:	rose
remoto;:	remote;
fijó:	fixed
calmada:	calm
gemidos.:	moans.
adolorida:	sore
mirarme:	look at me
infantil:	children's
humilde:	humble
rompió:	broke
avilantez:	degrade
defenderla:	defend her
naciendo:	being born
doblándose:	bending
desolado:	bleak
Temis:	It was
embarazo.:	pregnancy.
pregunté:	I asked
Justicia.:	Justice.
encarnación:	incarnation
Poder:	Can
femenina:	feminine
majestuosa:	majestic
estatua:	the state
Parecía:	It seemed
Átala.:	Atala.
ridiculizante:	ridiculous
designaba:	designated
embrolladas:	muddled
tramitaciones:	procedures
pérfidos:	perfidious
lazos:	ties
confundiría:	would confuse
sinuosos:	sinuous
enredados:	tangled
atado:	tied
advirtió:	warned
modelarla:	with models
vestido:	dress
negrura:	blackness
atiesada:	Atisara
Helada:	Frost
fiscales.:	prosecutors.
abogados:	lawyers
registro:	record
bajó:	low
paroxismo...:	paroxysm...
ascendía:	ascended
monólogo:	monologue
lacerarse:	lacerate
aplazados:	postponed
dramáticas:	dramatic
inhibiciones:	inhibitions
Sospecho:	I suspect
justeza.:	fairness.
apoyando:	supporting
inmóvil:	still
delgados:	thin
gestos::	gestures:
impresionó:	impressed
escenario.:	scenery.
alzó:	raised
Entonces:	So
inquebrantable.:	unwavering.
expone:	exposes
alterado:	changed
repetí:	I repeated
atención.:	attention.
escuchar:	listen
colocó:	placed
amenazada:	threatened
viéndose:	seeing each other
distensión:	distension
serpiente.:	snake.
rastreada:	tracked
plantando:	planting
prestaban:	they lent
134
:	134
desconcierto:	bewilderment
aumentar:	increase
divirtiendo:	having fun
aposento:	chamber
caballería.:	chivalry.
secretos:	secrets
callaban:	they were silent
callarse:	shut up
debían:	they had to
pruebas:	evidence
prestigios:	impressive
comunes;:	common;
asidero:	handle
pintaba:	painted
llaves.:	keys.
requería:	required
incomprensible:	incomprehensible
imprevisto:	sudden
presentando:	presenting
saqué:	I took out
decisivo:	decisive
asestar:	deal
enfriar.:	cool.
puestos:	positions
vinos:	wines
departamento:	department
dispuesta:	willing
delicada:	delicate
conclusión:	conclusion
reconfortante:	comforting
faltaría:	would be missing
previsto:	predicted
abrazo:	hug
anticipación:	anticipation
suyas:	his
colocadas:	placed
pantuflas:	slippers
velador:	pedestal table
mejores:	best
sábanas:	bed sheets
arreglada:	fixed
magnánimo.:	magnanimous.
sollozante:	sobbing
vendría:	would come
castigada:	punished
comprensión:	comprehension
endulzando:	sweetening
aceptar.:	accept.
generosa:	generous
compasión:	compassion
mejor.:	better.
verdad—.:	TRUE-.
moradas:	purple
devuelta:	returned
regresara:	will return
—desde:	-from
engañosas:	misleading
falacias:	fallacies
significaban:	they meant
desprecio:	contempt
vicios:	vices
desprendimiento:	detachment
Sigue.»:	Go on."
Sigue...:	Go on...
«Sigue...:	"Go on...
operación:	operation
gimiente:	moaning
estertor:	rattle
acertaba:	was right
jadeante:	panting
desplomada:	collapsed
físico.:	physical.
impudor:	impudence
juvenil:	youth
astrales:	astral
adornado:	decorated
hablé:	I spoke
injustificada.:	unjustified.
aparentemente:	apparently
ruptura:	rupture
acarrea:	carries
trastornos:	disorders
transformado:	transformed
distante;:	distant;
detalle:	detail
hincada:	kneeling
revelado:	revealed
añadir:	add
vindicativa:	vindictive
llevado:	carried
séptimo:	seventh
fornicación:	fornication
reducida:	reduced
antepuesta:	anteposed
Culpé:	Culpe
dinero.:	money.
innegable:	undeniable
abyecta:	abject
asistiera:	would attend
largando:	letting go
precipité:	precipitate
contenerse:	contain
cólera:	anger
estallido:	pop
adelantarme:	get ahead
apretar:	squeeze
hundido:	sunken
crispadas:	tense
mucho—:	a lot-
ocultaba:	hid
defecto:	flaw
dejaba:	left
sardónica:	sardonic
mueca:	grin
trágicas:	tragic
yesosa:	of sauce
palabras;:	words;
ridículo.:	ridiculous.
oportunidad.:	chance.
pérfida:	perfidious
evidenciado:	evidenced
equívoco:	misconception
querida.:	dear.
133
:	133
nación:	nation
ironía::	irony:
malvada:	evil
vislumbrar:	glimpse
impostura.:	imposture.
atribuir:	assign
vengando:	avenging
entender::	to understand:
entiendan:	understand
interesados:	interested
basta:	it just is
regresando:	returning
derribara:	would knock down
voluntariamente:	voluntarily
abandonó:	abandonment
Completa:	Complete
primitivos.:	primitives.
cosmogónicas:	cosmogonic
confiada:	confident
aprovecha:	take advantage
astrología:	astrology
estudiosa:	studious
relaciones.:	relations.
índole:	nature
justificar:	justify
erudición:	erudition
falsa:	false
despliegue:	deployment
evidentemente:	evidently
debidos:	due
Pitágoras:	Pythagoras
nombra:	name
indostánicos:	Hindustani
cita:	dream
movimientos;:	movements;
lluvia»:	rain"
especialista:	specialist
risibles:	laughable
errores:	errors
cometiendo:	committing
aterradora:	terrifying
intrepidez:	fearlessness
planetaria.:	planetary.
jerarquía:	hierarchy
relacionaron:	related
astrológico:	astrological
enfoque:	approach
organográfico:	organographic
estudiaba:	I studied
colaboradora:	collaborator
sorpresivo:	surprising
declaró:	declared
amante.:	lover.
tenida:	had
relata:	reports
revelaciones:	revelations
despreciable—:	negligible-
tabloide:	tabloid
—tomado:	-taken
artículo:	article
escándalo.:	scandal.
explotación:	exploitation
coloquio:	colloquium
fotografía:	photograph
trozo:	piece
encendidos:	on
violento:	violent
ademán:	gesture
decirle:	tell
temidos:	feared
retarda:	slows down
distracción:	distraction
alegro:	glad
deslizado:	slipped
vecino:	neighbor
recorte:	cutout
inclinado:	inclined
vez...:	time...
devuelve:	returns
maravillas.:	wonders.
falsas:	fake
arsenales:	arsenals
producido:	produced
sutil:	subtle
literatura:	literature
Toda:	All
muerto.:	dead.
entrepaños:	shelves
alineados:	aligned
aquello.:	that.
Ninguno:	None
otro.:	other.
entrara:	will enter
potestad:	power
arrogarse:	assume
atreviera:	dared
indignado:	indignant
extrañamente:	strangely
reposo»:	repose"
«Tómese:	«Take
empresa::	enterprise:
candilejas.:	footlights.
apagar:	to switch off
telón:	curtain
Ayuntamiento:	City hall
vestido.:	dress.
modelado:	modeling
escalinata:	staircase
entendidos:	understood
guiños:	winks
tribulaciones:	tribulations
persuasivamente:	persuasively
Protagonista:	Hero
quitar:	remove
agotarse:	run out
presiente:	present
engrandecida:	enlarged
Griseldis:	in Griseld
hablarle:	talk to him
Penélope:	Penelope
bodas;:	white;
ración—:	ration-
desflo:	deflo
—esta:	-this
estremecida:	extremecidal
132
:	132
aplaudir.:	applaud.
ganas:	desire
dicha:	bliss
ofrecerse:	offer
artimañas:	tricks
atenta:	attentive
admirar:	admire
dándose:	giving
insinuante:	insinuating
diversa:	different
matizada:	nuanced
actuación:	performance
actualidades:	news
camarógrafo:	cameraman
esbelta:	slender
próxima:	next
acompañará:	will accompany
declaración:	declaration
breve:	brief
citó:	cited
coloca:	put
sorprendido;:	surprised;
íntimo:	intimate
golosina:	candy
cartera;:	briefcase;
oportuna:	timely
oblea:	wafer
importante:	important
jaqueca:	migraine
alivia:	relieve
acecha;:	stalks;
fotógrafo:	photographer
entona:	gas
inasible;:	ungraspable;
ubicua:	ubiquitous
resurgir:	resurface
desaparece:	disappears
desliza:	slide
partes;:	parts;
Está:	This
bailarina.:	ballerina.
movilidad:	mobility
ama:	or
usurpa:	usurp
iniciativa:	initiative
quitando:	removing
gravitación:	gravitation
eje:	axis
desenredando:	unraveling
enredando:	getting tangled up
vida::	life:
retratos:	portraits
Ayuntamiento.:	City hall.
encamino:	on the way
espectros:	spectra
Escoltado:	Escorted
decían.:	they said.
desaparecen:	disappear
obligada:	obligatory
concurrencia:	concurrence
estrechamente:	tightly
olvidado::	forgotten:
surgir:	to emerge
envuelven:	they wrap
ya—.:	of—.
—completamente:	-completely
públicas:	public
relaciones:	relations
comisionado:	commissioner
sincronización:	synchronization
finalmente:	finally
bailarina:	ballerina
cerámicas:	ceramics
pintor:	painter
municipalidad:	municipality
gobierno:	government
funcionarios:	officials
Facultades;:	Faculties;
Decanos:	Deans
encabezada:	headed
delegación:	delegation
emocionado;:	thrilled;
aeródromo.:	aerodrome.
rotos:	broken
cegado:	blind
hombro.:	shoulder.
prorrumpir:	break out
viste:	showed
tejido:	tissue
reconozco:	I recognize
flancos;:	flanks;
abrigos:	shelters
escalerilla:	ladder
señalen:	point out
librar:	librate
adversario:	adversary
repudio.:	repudiation.
acallan:	silence
desarman:	disarm
ternura:	tenderness
asistidos:	assisted
amada:	loved
ejercer:	exercise
tiranías::	tyrannies:
combatir:	combat
mí—.:	my-.
deserción:	desertion
brusca:	abrupt
explicaría:	would explain
—gravidez:	-pregnancy
agravarse:	get worse
remordimientos.:	regrets.
plantearé:	I will raise
treinta:	thirty
Cobraré:	I will charge
relato.:	report.
veracidad:	veracity
sucedidos:	successful
indígenas:	indigenous
precisan:	they need
suramericano:	south american
escritor:	writer
famosa:	famous
encontraron.:	they found.
«misión»:	"mission"
llegué:	I arrived
hambriento:	hungry
kilómetros:	kilometers
131
:	131
atravesando:	passing through
fugarme:	run away
logré:	I managed
desconfiada:	suspicious
tribmás:	tribmore
venderé:	I will sell
inspiran:	inspire
plantado:	planted
apartado:	apart
«misión:	"mission
reportes:	reports
refirieron:	they referred
visitantes:	visitors
equivaldría:	would be equivalent
ahora—.:	now-.
—ya:	—of
innumerables:	countless
exclusividad:	exclusiveness
reservarle:	reserve
acepté:	I accepted
meses.:	months.
rito:	here
rutinario:	routine
acoplado:	coupled
desventura:	misfortune
suspenso:	suspended
pulso:	pulse
emergido:	emerged
inteligible:	intelligible
parasitarios:	parasitic
entrecortada:	choppy
despedida:	farewell
tomaría:	would take
permaneciera:	would remain
grité:	I screamed
rogativas:	prayers
incluían:	included
hispánicas:	hispanic
antesala:	anteroom
traería:	would bring
Aterrado:	Grounded
conmigo.:	with me.
decirme.:	tell me
entendí:	understood
reía:	laughed
Lloraba:	I cried
teléfono.:	telephone.
hemisferio:	hemisphere
venida:	coming
Kappelmeister:	Bandmaster
Estaba:	Was
embuste.:	scam.
arrumba:	rumba
embustero.:	liar.
aplaudir:	applaud
aplaudirme:	applaud me
disponen:	they have
pendientes:	earrings
orbe:	the world
ciernen:	hover
guerras:	wars
capaces:	capable
Millones:	Millions
cornadas.:	gored.
toreo:	bullfighting
albur:	dace
riesgos:	risks
elegido:	elected
libremente:	freely
desempeño:	performance
bárbaros:	barbarians
enternece:	internecially
hacinados:	overcrowded
fríamente:	coldly
soportar:	endure
sobrecoge:	overwhelms
entera.:	whole.
familias:	families
holgada:	baggy
irritado.:	irritated.
avergonzado:	ashamed
enterando:	finding out
evoquen:	evoke
Ana:	Well
Crónica:	Chronicle
Pequeña:	Small
normas:	norms
infringir:	infringe
talento:	talent
científica:	scientific
investigación:	investigation
mártir:	martyr
refieren:	refer
artículos:	articles
persistente:	persistent
temática:	thematic
ejemplar.:	copy.
lectores:	readers
presentarme:	introduce myself
empeña:	pawn
congraciarse:	ingratiate
aviadores:	aviators
premiar:	reward
generosamente:	generously
sobremanera::	exceedingly:
130
:	130
conyugal.:	conjugal.
cuadro:	chart
trazado:	having sex
mimetismo-mágico-rítmico:	magic-rhythmic mimicry
absurda:	absurd
á:	on
uniforme:	uniform
Jesús:	Jesus
regañadientes—:	reluctant—
aceptada:	accepted
incluso:	even
publicadas:	published
nacional.:	national.
desaparición:	disappearance
geográfica:	geographical
inexplorada:	unexplored
hallara:	to cases
exigiera:	demanded
luego—:	then-
sanguinarias:	bloodthirsty
tribus:	three
sabios:	wise
viajeros:	travelers
evocaron:	evoked
tarde—:	afternoon—
fuere:	was
—quien:	-who
comienzos:	beginnings
mías:	mine
revelando:	revealing
diario:	diary
redacción:	wording
réplica:	replica
sollozar:	sob
Rompió:	Broke
corazonada.:	hunch.
cuentan—:	count—
estando:	standing
mapa:	map
Organográfico:	Organographic
irguiendo:	erecting
periodistas:	journalists
recortes:	clippings
mostraron:	showed
envidiarme::	envy me:
atracción:	attraction
contrasentido:	contradiction
desarrollarse.:	develop.
tendrán:	they will have
preparando:	preparing
humos:	fumes
papel::	paper:
interpretar:	interpret
clima.:	climate.
cronologías:	chronologies
escaparon:	they escaped
pasmosa:	astonishing
cálculo:	calculation
opresión:	oppression
angustiosa:	distressing
alegran:	they rejoice
Mientras:	While
ventanillas.:	windows.
paseando:	strolling
luminosas:	luminous
geometrías:	geometries
ubicar:	locate
divierten:	have fun
Algunos:	Some
encenderse.:	light.
humo—:	in it—
colosos:	colossi
carcomidos:	eaten away
truncos:	trunks
manso:	meek
Acabamos:	We're done
sueños:	dreams
viviendo.:	living.
SEXTO:	SIXTH
129
:	129
alcanzando.:	reaching.
altitud:	altitude
aturdido:	stunned
visibilidad:	visibility
volaremos:	we will fly
Avisado:	Warned
aisla:	isolate
niebla:	fog
ascendemos:	we ascend
bonanza:	see them
buitres.:	vultures.
revuelo:	stir
cayó:	fell
Lejos:	Far
viuda.:	widow.
olfato—:	smell—
—dividida:	—divided
advertir:	warn
alzar:	raise
camina:	walk
128
:	128
cogollo.:	heart.
sacude:	shake
molinetes:	pinwheels
vecinos.:	neighbors.
invadida:	invaded
giramos:	we turn
Meseta:	Plateau
rasando:	rage
abajo;:	below;
quedan:	remain
ruedas:	wheels
encajar:	fit
trepidante:	trembling
inmovilidad:	immobility
explanada;:	esplanade;
motores:	engines
metálica:	metallic
seña.:	sign.
cabina:	cabin
jubilosa.:	jubilant
prorrumpen:	they break out
avión.:	plane.
acariciado.:	caressed
abrazaban:	they hugged
zafa:	they died
beso:	kiss
mirarme.:	look at me
rencoroso:	rancorous
llevar»:	carry"
puedes:	can
valiosa:	valuable
entrego:	I deliver
despectiva.:	derogatory
encogiéndose:	shrinking
decidir.:	decide.
explico:	I explain
imperativo.:	imperative.
nombrando.:	naming.
mirara:	will look
mirara.:	would look
acababa:	ended
liberador.:	liberating.
mensaje:	message
sabía.:	knew.
aplauso—:	applause-
huera:	hula
envanecerme:	get puffed up
Aunque:	Although
torceduras.:	sprains.
curaran:	curan
creyera:	believed
respecto:	regard
curado:	cured
ejucutándola:	ejucutandola
entenderían:	they would understand
destinada:	intended
directores:	directors
correo:	mail
quedando:	staying
producida:	produced
estaría:	would be
obstaculizar:	hinder
comprendiera:	would understand
Aceptaría:	I would accept
malograda.:	ill-fated
ataba:	he won't be
rotura:	rip
cumplimiento:	compliance
exigía:	demanded
brusca;:	abrupt;
adaptación:	adaptation
lealmente:	loyally
explicarle:	explain
comunicado:	statement
enviado:	sent
común.:	common.
requieren:	require
legítimo:	legitimate
gobierna:	governs
adoctrina:	doctrine
Caza:	Hunt
cumplen:	they comply
Todos:	All
demás.:	others.
iré:	I will go
decisión::	decision:
aluminio.:	aluminum.
cabaña.:	cabin.
turbaban:	they were disturbing
presencias:	presences
librarán:	will free
envueltos:	wrapped
127
:	127
deberían:	should
sube:	go up
apremiarme.:	urge me
enérgicamente:	strongly
apetecer:	feel like
colocan.:	place.
Cuadernos:	Notebooks
denegación:	denial
hongos.:	fungus.
importa.:	matters.
demostrar:	demonstrate
altiva:	haughty
míos:	mine
evitan:	they avoid
disgusto:	disgust
expresa:	express
aquí...:	here...
botellas:	bottles
pomos:	snitches
expresadas:	expressed
tinta::	ink:
carecer:	lack
brasa.:	ember
asadas:	roasted
innecesario:	unnecessary
lastre:	plates
aficiones:	hobbies
tiempos::	time:
prescindir:	dispense with
palabras::	words:
resumen:	summary
carezco:	I lack
ánimo.:	cheer up.
desplaza:	move
jorth.:	Jorath.
poema::	poem:
despierta:	wake up
piloto.:	pilot.
imperioso:	imperious
libros.:	books.
Recomienza:	Restart
poderosa:	powerful
denegación.:	denial.
arrancar:	start up
suelte:	release
marcharme:	leave
recoja:	pick up
encontrara.:	will find
dondequiera:	wherever
alcanzarme:	reach me
inaplazable:	unavoidable
convocatoria:	call
expresado:	voiced
suceder:	happen
emplea::	uses:
infinito:	infinite
atronador.:	thunderous.
hablarme:	talk to me
ajenos;:	aliens;
telones:	curtains
frondosos.:	leafy.
espesarse;:	thicken;
habitado.:	inhabited.
deshabitado:	unoccupied
ablanda.:	softens
desconcierta:	baffles
ardiente:	burning
líquido:	liquid
miope—.:	short-sighted—.
lentes:	glasses
sanos:	healthy
coincidir:	coincide
aciertan:	they get it right
litografía:	lithography
tiro:	number
movidas:	moved
incómodamente:	uncomfortably
superponemos:	we overlap
estampa;:	print;
ajustarse:	conform
agitarse:	shake
Conservatorio.:	Conservatory.
hurtadillas:	sneaking
fumaba:	I smoked
tabaco:	tobacco
126
:	126
cigarrillos:	cigarettes
renace:	reborn
cigarrillo:	cigarette
hielo.:	ice.
vinagre:	vinegar
marisco:	seafood
apio:	celery
té:	has
apremiantes:	pressing
llamadas:	calls
paladar.:	palate.
celosa:	jealous
olvidadas.:	forgotten.
apetencias:	desires
lúcida:	lucid
envuelve:	wraps
sorbo:	sip
probado:	tried
beber.:	to drink.
desenrosca:	unscrew
aparta:	separate
capuchino.:	cappuccino.
vendas:	sales
cuchillos:	knives
conservas:	preserves
medicamentos:	medicines
entregan:	deliver
aterrizaje:	landing
habérseme:	have me
paracaídas:	parachute
impermeables:	waterproof
bulto:	bulk
sacan:	they take out
Romanticismo.:	Romance.
presente—:	present—
identifican:	identify
regresándose:	returning
ochenta:	eighty
cifra:	cipher
recta.:	straight.
línea:	line
fraguas:	forges
buscaban.:	they were looking for
agitar:	shake
pensaron:	they thought
huella:	fingerprint
suelos:	floors
otear:	otter
aglomeración:	agglomeration
divisar:	spot
asombraron:	they amazed
turbonada.:	turbo nada.
esquivar:	dodge
buscar.:	look for.
dispersión:	dispersion
orientados:	oriented
rescate.:	rescue.
cuantioso:	large
reactualizando:	updating
publicados:	published
torturado.:	tortured.
insidiosa:	insidious
sanguinarios.:	bloodthirsty
quién—:	who-
buscando.:	searching.
aviones:	airplanes
nombre.:	name.
aparato::	device:
impulso.:	impulse.
frena:	brake
oportuno:	timely
viraje:	turn
suelo;:	floor;
bajo.:	low.
vacilando:	hesitating
despejar:	clear
apartarlos:	separate them
alborotando:	rioting
contagioso:	contagious
regocijo:	joy
explanada:	esplanade
señal.:	sign.
Advierto:	I warn
titubeo:	hesitation
paralelamente:	in parallel
hélice:	propeller
removido:	removed
explosión;:	burst;
un.:	and.
125
:	125
aferrada:	clinging
separan:	separate
nuevamente;:	again;
romperse:	break
prestas:	lend
gente.:	people.
«cosa:	"What
pasmados:	stunned
Neolítico.:	Neolithic.
aterrorizados:	terrified
huyen:	Huyen
gira:	tour
volteo.:	I turn.
precipitación:	precipitation
acunado:	cradled
encima.:	on.
fusil.:	gun.
arreció:	escalated
mojada.:	wet
terminó:	term
derritiendo.:	melting.
cerosa:	waxy
escurría:	drained
desintegraba:	disintegrated
encarnada:	red
emborronando:	blurring
desdibujando:	blurring
seguía:	continued
mirar::	look:
forcé:	strength
estampido:	stamped
rebotando:	bouncing
confundieron:	confused
disparos:	shots
Sonaron:	They sounded
derecho.:	right.
perdigones:	shot
izquierdo:	left
cañón:	canon
habías:	had
atreven:	dare
arrancó:	started
colérico:	choleric
Ejecutor.:	Executor.
iniciaría:	would start
deslindes:	demarcations
levantan:	they lift
siempre.:	always.
cambiar:	change
gatillo:	trigger
apretara:	will squeeze
resistía:	resisted
rapiña.:	rapine.
anulado:	annulled
suprimido:	deleted
contaminándola:	contaminating it
destrozado:	destroyed
indignante:	outrageous
inmundo;:	unclean;
Apagar:	To switch off
apagarlos.:	turn them off.
dependía:	it depended
mirando.:	looking.
párpados:	eyelids
ahí::	there:
apuntar.:	aim.
Volví:	I returned
—apremió—.:	-pressure-.
«Dispara:	«Shoot
volví:	I returned
morir.:	to die
pedía:	asked
Bajé:	I went down
onjejión».:	objection".
onjejión...:	objection...
«onjejión...:	"objection...
como::	as:
ininteligible:	unintelligible
gatillo.:	trigger.
decidía:	decided
Levanté:	Levant
«Apunta:	«Aim
mirándonos:	looking at us
detuvo::	stopped:
rastreador:	tracker
Avanzamos:	We move forward
llovida.:	rained
maleza:	evil
trillo:	trill
concertábamos:	we arranged
leproso.:	leper.
estábamos:	we were
oscurecer:	darken
Anduvimos:	We walked
huellas.:	footprints.
encorvado:	curved
pasas:	passes
Unos:	Some
sucias:	dirty
violación:	rape
Llegamos:	we arrived
manatí.:	manatee.
124
:	124
arrastraban:	they dragged
fangosas:	muddy
turbulentas:	turbulent
echamos:	we cast
paños:	cloths
Envolvimos:	We get involved
seguirlo.:	follow him.
índice:	index
Poniendo:	putting
perdurar:	endure
armeros:	gunsmiths
troquel:	die
cañones:	cannons
larguísimos:	very long
fusiles:	rifles
brazo::	arm:
deslizó:	slipped
puños:	cuffs
apretaba:	squeezed
agresiva.:	aggressive
consentida:	consented
repugnante:	disgusting
culpables:	guilty
fuésemos:	we were
indecible::	unspeakable:
indignación:	indignation
sublimado.:	sublimate.
ungüento:	ointment
frota:	fleet
entrepiernas:	of the enterprises
telarañas:	cobwebs
tapón:	plug
selváticos:	jungle
latente.:	latent.
reproche:	reproach
encerrara:	closed
aquí»:	here"
alrededores.:	surroundings.
batida:	beat
garrotes:	clubs
armados:	armed
hilachas:	threads
hemorragia:	hemorrhage
restañando:	stagnating
desgarrándole:	tearing him
violarla:	rape her
supo:	knew
aclaración:	clarification
lograron:	they managed
horrorizado:	horrified
rodillas.:	knees.
ensangrentada:	bloody
atroz::	atrocious:
aguacero.:	downpour.
arropada:	clothed
Capitán.:	Captain.
corno:	horn
trompa:	trunk
imaginaciones:	imaginations
sorprendo:	I surprise
dedos...:	fingers...
ensalivarse:	ensalivate
antebrazo:	forearm
doblar:	fold
sopesarlo:	weigh it
Puse:	Party
oído.:	ear.
llovía:	it was raining
cobrar:	charge
volvimos:	we came back
deleite:	treat
abrazo.:	hug.
calores:	heats
adueñó:	took over
oyó:	heard
respiro:	breath
terminado.:	finished.
creímos:	we believed
verdor:	greenery
espárrago:	asparagus
nacen:	are born
estiércol:	manure
serosidades:	serosities
nacera:	had been born
orina:	urine
excreción:	excretion
vecindad:	neighborhood
engendrará:	will engender
engendrarse:	beget
podre:	rotten
Llegaron:	They arrived
amenas.:	pleasant.
venenosa.:	poisonous.
culebra:	snake
fundido:	cast
blandido:	brandished
cortarse:	cut
enormemente.:	enormously.
aburriéndose:	getting bored
tejiendo:	knitting
pasan:	pass
anegada:	flooded
rastreado:	tracked
desaparecieron:	they disappeared
chinches:	bed bugs
123
:	123
lluvia.:	rain.
cumpliendo:	fulfilling
estuvieran:	were
pliegue:	fold
coladas:	glued
filtraciones:	leaks
farallones:	cliffs
podrida.:	rotten
criaturas:	creatures
numerosas:	numerous
sapos:	frogs
cantaron:	sing
treparon:	they climbed
multiplicaron:	multiplied
malangas;:	oily;
regocija;:	rejoices;
traidoras.:	traitors
cieno:	silt
hundiéndome:	sinking
lodo:	official
huele:	smells
fango.:	mud.
empellón:	shove
quebradas:	ravines
arrancadas:	sprints
diques:	discs
ahogados.:	drowned
balsas:	the voice
acarreando:	carrying
sucios:	dirty
colores:	colors
necesitada:	needy
mantiene:	maintains
difuminado:	blurred
interminables.:	endless
escuece:	stings
negativa:	negative
matrimonio:	marriage
mentar:	ment
primeros.:	first.
guiones:	scripts
enmendando:	amending
papel—:	paper-
consumo:	consumption
decir::	say:
imaginativa:	imagination
maravillosa:	wonderful
están.:	are.
quedarán:	fall
llenadas:	filled
sesenta:	sixty
oportunas:	timely
siembras:	sowing
procederse:	proceed
reparar:	fix
pasarse:	go
quiera.:	want.
propone:	proposes
advirtiéndome:	warning me
compadecido:	pitied
volvería.:	I would go back.
mulata:	mulatto
casara:	married
Mulato:	Mulatto
cantar::	sing:
carabelas—:	caravels—
bordo:	edge
sonó:	rang
invito:	invitation
Horrorizado:	Horrified
sanciones.:	sanctions.
mayores:	older
atrevía:	dared
población.:	population.
venir:	come
olvidado.:	forgotten.
122
:	122
distante:	distant
andando.:	going.
arrastrándose:	crawling
alforja:	saddlebag
separarlo:	separate it
horquillada:	bracketed
suavemente:	gently
empuja:	push
enojo—.:	anger-.
«¡Vete:	«¡Yourself
pavor.:	dread.
muda:	time
arrodillada:	kneeling
gesticula:	gestures
pesadilla:	nightmare
ceniza.:	ash.
tráquea:	windpipe
desintegración:	disintegration
licuarse:	liquefy
disolverse:	dissolve
endurecido:	hard
sujeta:	subject
escoria:	slag
piltrafa:	piltraf
residuo:	residue
selvas.:	jungles.
depositarios:	depositories
Levítico:	Leviticus
olvidada:	forgotten
clásica:	classic
lepra;:	leprosy;
falta...:	lack...
legalizado:	legalized
firmado:	signed
reunida.:	reunited.
indiada:	Indian
fórmula:	formula
pronunciar:	pronounce
aspira:	aspire
casarse;:	marry;
obligarla:	force her
inferioridad:	inferiority
humillado:	humiliated
réplica.:	replica.
campesina:	peasant
Confieso:	I confess
cuidado».:	Careful".
dé:	god
depende:	it depends
sentenciosa—:	judgmental—
unión:	union
Casarse:	Marry
desórdenes:	disorders
entronizado:	enthroned
marido:	husband
abandona:	abandon
guardias:	guards
mandar:	to send
alguno.:	some.
valer:	worth
abandonarlo:	abandon it
facultad:	faculty
descarría:	astray
asiste:	attend
defenderse:	fend
recurso:	resource
temen::	friend:
recóndito:	recondite
argumentación:	argumentation
dolido:	hurt
celoso:	jealous
matrimonio.:	marriage.
asombrado:	amazed
catecúmenos:	catechumens
protagonista:	hero
casemos.:	let's get married
deseable:	desirable
preguntarle:	ask him
decido:	a decision
hable.:	speak.
observar:	notice
podrá:	will be able
humedad.:	humidity.
encender:	light
121
:	121
exigencia.:	requirement.
hamaca.:	hammock.
recuesto:	reclining
calmado:	calm
creer:	believe
hacérselo:	do it
totalmente:	fully
escribiré:	I will write
escribirlo:	write it
Debo:	I must
nunca.:	never.
ejecute:	run
trombón.:	thrombo.
cornos:	horns
fagot:	bassoon
clarinetes:	clarinets
órgano::	organ:
libreta::	notebook:
quedará:	will remain
jurarme:	swear to me
risible.:	laughable.
insentato:	senseless
escuchada:	heard
esperado:	expected
audiencias.:	hearings.
vastas:	answered
especialmente:	especially
destina:	intended
ejecutada.:	executed.
cartas:	cards
escribiendo:	writing
exasperado:	exasperated
estúpido:	idiot
escollo:	stumbling block
toparse:	bump
menguado:	diminished
maniatado:	tied up
cohibe:	control
generosidad:	generosity
contraria:	contradicts
avara:	spacious
mezquina:	petty
papel;:	paper;
milímetro:	millimeter
pendolista:	commuter
astucias:	cunning
Aprieto:	Fix
llueve:	it's raining
envolturas:	wrappers
yutas:	Yuta
tejidos:	fabrics
pródiga:	prodigal
Alguna:	Some
problema.:	problem.
urgencia:	urgency
cuaderno.:	notebook.
apretado:	tight
voces...:	you...
sirviendo:	serving
—episodio:	-episode
lírico:	lyrical
introduciendo:	introducing
esfuerzo.:	effort.
lográndolo:	achieving it
concentrarme:	concentrate
cavilación:	rumination
acoso:	harassment
huir:	flee
inquebrantable:	unwavering
propuesto:	proposed
proceder:	proceed
rectitud:	rectitude
echará:	will cast
acepto—:	I accept—
mentira:	lie
plácida:	placid
falseándose:	falsifying
digo—:	I say—
mentir.:	lie.
dilema:	dilemma
disparadero.:	shooting
coloque:	put
actuará:	will act
tácticas:	tactics
probables:	probable
canalladas.:	scoundrels
Dios».:	God".
«marido:	"husband
atroz:	atrocious
posible—.:	possible-.
viviente:	living
albergar:	harbor
120
:	120
engañarla:	cheat on her
subleva:	revolt
estimo:	esteem
atañe:	concerns
lealtad:	loyalty
mentira;:	lie;
sentirme:	feel
estafas.:	scams.
contentos.:	happy
quedarían:	would remain
pedida:	requested
ejemplar:	copy
prestarme:	lend me
delito:	crime
bigamia:	bigamy
importaría:	would matter
ya.:	of.
casado:	married
molesta::	bothers:
literarios:	literary
reacciones:	reactions
fáciles:	easy
burla:	derision
confesarme:	confess to me
tamborileo.:	patter.
malangas:	oily
anchas:	wide
temporalmente:	temporarily
calafateada:	the caulking
rajaduras:	cracks
salgo:	I'm on my way out
carcajada:	laugh
estampa.:	print.
consentido:	spoiled
bendita:	blessed
asperjar:	asparagus
Habrá:	There will be
tracen:	trace
gozarse:	enjoy
samaritano.:	Samaritan.
sayal:	skirts
escondidas:	hidden
ataduras:	restraints
relucir:	shine
decirle::	tell him:
guardando:	watching
encojo:	I shrink
Sorprendido:	Surprised
oyeran:	they would hear
recogerse:	pick up
rebaño:	herd
ovejas:	sheep
frase:	phrase
justificando:	justifying
legitimidad:	legitimacy
tolera:	tolerate
improperios:	expletives
profiere:	utters
insulta:	stroke
iracundo:	wrathful
tiempo;:	time;
hincharse:	swell
ministerio.:	ministry.
diciéndole:	telling him
aplomo:	aplomb
Repentinamente:	suddenly
instaurarse:	establish
santificadas:	sanctified
uniones:	unions
casarme:	get married
Afirma:	states
evangelización:	evangelism
entorpecer:	hinder
sensatas:	sensible
cultas:	cultured
cuestión.:	question.
balbuceo:	babbling
concubinato:	concubinage
Casamientos.:	Marriages.
Registro:	Record
Entierros:	Burials
Bautizo:	Christening
llevarse:	take away
quejarme:	complain
Enojado:	Angry
pautados.:	ruled.
partituras:	sheet music
necesitan:	need
carabelas:	caravels
siendo:	being
tocadores:	players
arpistas:	harpists
músicas:	songs
relación:	relationship
establece:	establishes
Según:	According to
despecho:	spite
calmar:	calm
músicas.:	songs.
despilfarrarse:	waste
utilidad:	utility
consignar:	record
actas:	minutes
destinaban:	they destined
explicándome:	explaining
último»:	last"
necesitaba:	I needed
expliqué:	explain
tragaba.:	swallowed
preguntó:	asked
pedir:	ask
Acabo:	Just
119
:	119
estados:	states
duerma:	sleep
descifrar.:	decipher.
taquigrafía:	shorthand
reduciendo:	reducing
brote:	outbreak
impulsado:	driven
jubilosa:	jubilant
escribo:	I write
ceñir.:	gird.
criticar:	criticize
tachar:	cross out
plomo:	lead
atrepellándose:	running over
llenaran:	will fill
bajadas:	descents
asombra:	amazes
invento:	invention
polémicas:	controversies
aburrimiento:	boredom
manifiestos:	manifestos
conciertos:	concerts
levantarse.:	get up.
pugnara:	fight
acallando:	silencing
asepsia:	asepsis
orden»:	order"
«regreso:	"return
impresionar:	impress
inventarse.:	invent
sonante:	resounding
disimulada:	disguised
pobreza:	poverty
ricercare:	search
trepidaban:	trembled
contrarios:	opposites
martillados:	hammered
desencuadrados:	out of frame
redondas—:	round—
existido:	existed
corcheas:	eighth notes
movimientos:	movements
Concerti:	Concerts
autores:	authors
aquejado:	afflicted
locomotriz:	locomotive
lentos:	boards
enjundia:	substance
olvidarlos:	forget them
olvidaban:	they forgot
actualizado:	updated
«desarrollar»—:	"develop"-
—
la:	—
the
calco:	cast
perdurabilidad:	perdurability
rispidos:	harsh
registros:	records
adrede:	ready
asperezas:	roughness
disonancias:	dissonances
espíritu.:	spirit.
contrapuntísticas:	contrapuntal
tomando:	taking
cantada:	sung
miércoles:	Wednesday
empezaba:	started
artesanal:	artisanal
Encadenado»:	Chained»
«Prometeo:	"Prometheus
«Preludio»:	"Prelude"
desventurado:	hapless
mañosa:	crafty
asemejaba:	resembled
invocación:	invocation
homofónico:	homophonic
inscriben:	enroll
convergentes:	convergent
toscos:	rough
termino:	TERMS
renacer:	be reborn
apuntado:	pointed
imperiosa:	imperious
detengo.:	I stop.
anunciará:	will announce
edificio:	building
vosotros.»:	you."
remaba:	of father
despojos:	remains
desgracia.:	misfortune.
quémame:	burn me
funerales;:	funeral;
lágrimas:	tears
abandones:	abandon
imploración::	entreaty:
preludio:	prelude
interpretaré:	I will interpret
gemido:	moan
118
:	118
caminos».:	paths.
«su:	"are
llora:	cry
queja:	complaint
colocar:	to place
lanzas.:	spears.
caídos:	fallen
guerreros:	warriors
enlutadas:	mourners
estrofa:	stanza
imperceptiblemente:	imperceptibly
enternezca:	international
estructura:	structure
concibo:	I conceive
requerida:	required
sobras:	leftovers
derramado:	spilled
degollado:	beheaded
rebaños...:	flocks...
carnero:	SHEEP
daré:	I will give
sacrificaré:	I will sacrifice
Itaca:	Ithaca
prometo:	I promise
harina:	flour
Derramo:	I spill
libación:	libation
miel.:	Honey.
libaciones.:	libations.
«Hago:	"Do
solemne::	solemn:
evocación:	evocation
deseada.:	desired.
simplicidad:	simplicity
homérico:	Homeric
hojarasca:	leaf litter
aligerar:	lighten
sencilla::	simple:
bambú.:	bamboo.
retoño:	shoot
garrapatas:	ticks
limpiar:	clean
sienta:	feel
molestar:	annoy
ceño.:	frown.
obligado:	obliged
malos»:	bad»
«días:	"days
nervioso;:	highly strung;
alarma:	alarm
irritado:	irritated
Salgo:	I'm on my way out
peripecias.:	adventures
Polifemo:	Polyphemus
releo:	reread
necesito.:	need.
género:	gender
resultaría:	would result
astucias».:	cunning."
vástago:	stem
Laerte:	Laertes
majestad»:	majesty"
Cronos:	Chronos
invocatorias:	invocatory
usar:	to use
niego:	him
descorazonarme:	dishearten me
vacilación:	hesitation
empastadas:	pasted
—Estos:	-These
Gramática:	Grammar
Epítome:	Epitome
francés;:	French;
secundarios;:	secondary;
estudios:	studies
alemán:	German
Sabía:	Knew
¿cuál:	which
profunda.:	deep
desierta:	deserted
poeta:	poet
resabios.:	aftertaste
sorprenderme:	surprise me
ejecutado».:	executed".
«verme:	«don't give
inconsciente:	unconscious
enoja:	angry
artístico.:	artistic.
ejecución:	execution
obstáculo:	obstacle
constituiría:	would constitute
bíblico:	biblical
alejaría:	would distance
cristiana:	Christian
pareciéndose:	resembling
excelentes:	excellent
óperas:	operas
despoja:	strips
asunto:	affair
descubro:	I discover
Hojeando:	Browsing
Usualis:	Usual
Líber:	Bast
libros::	books:
117
:	117
tendré:	I will have
caldearse:	get hot
lije:	pours
furia.:	rage
ménade:	maenad
irrumpen:	break in
infierno»:	hell"
«perras:	«bitches
reinan:	reign
Madres:	Mothers
arcilla:	clay
siento.:	I feel.
tormentas::	storms:
coros:	choirs
directas::	direct:
admirablemente:	admirably
correspondido:	reciprocated
conforme:	according to
resurrección:	Resurrection
implícito:	implicit
asocio:	association
encadenado:	chained
liberación:	release
Segundo:	Second
Desencadenado:	Unchained
proyecto:	project
fidelidad:	fidelity
regla:	ruler
sirviéndome:	serving me
trazo:	I bring
libretas;:	notebooks;
corriendo:	in a hurry
transcurrida...:	elapsed...
transcurrida:	elapsed
Cobraba:	He charged
faltaba.:	was missing.
intuía:	I intuited
resto::	rest:
músico:	musician
gruñir:	snarl
maneras:	ways
alternación:	alternation
mágica:	magic
reclamada:	defendant
nota:	use
necesitar:	need
transformaba:	transformed
exorcismo:	exorcism
palabra-célula:	word-cell
renació:	reborn
auténtico:	authentic
roían:	gnawed
babeantes:	drooling
creían:	they believed
superioridad:	superiority
ufanarme:	weapon
hicieran:	they did
hombres;:	men;
lección:	lesson
orines.:	urine.
excrementos:	excrement
postrados:	prostrate
ponzoña:	poison
escuché:	listen
monstruos:	monsters
Paleolítico:	Paleolithic
resembrada:	reseeded
asombro::	astonishment:
reflexión.:	reflection.
deleitosa:	delightful
sorprende:	surprise
momento...:	moment...
aprovechados:	taken advantage of
empezaban:	they started
inexplotados:	unexploited
eclesiásticos:	ecclesiastics
habilidoso:	skillful
trombón:	trombone
contrabajo:	double bass
flautín:	piccolo
diálogos:	dialogues
sorprendentes:	surprising
116
:	116
citaba:	cited
especulando:	speculating
defenderme:	defend myself
incitaciones.:	incitements.
riesgosas:	risky
entrañaba:	entailed
reinvención:	reinvention
engendrados:	begotten
estilos:	styles
musicales.:	musicals.
implicaciones:	implications
palabra-
célula:	word-
cell
indiscutible:	indisputable
intrincada:	intricate
resultado:	result
presentada:	presented
simultaneidad:	simultaneity
percepción:	perception
oyente:	listener
prepararía:	would prepare
expresiva:	expressive
intensidad:	intensity
aumento:	increase
sinfónica:	symphonic
machihembradas:	mb lada s to town
concertadas:	concerted
armónico:	harmonic
polifónica:	polyphonic
coexistencia:	coexistence
contrapuntístico.:	contrapuntal.
enriquecimiento:	enrichment
entregarse:	surrender
compactado:	compressed
oposiciones:	oppositions
armónica:	harmonica
variación:	variation
coloreaba.:	colored
diversificaba:	diversified
sonoros:	sound
constantes:	constants
creaba:	created
compostelano.:	compost it
femenino—:	female-
masculino:	masculine
—elemento:	-element
ordenaban:	they ordered
primicial:	first time
sucesivas:	successive
entradas:	entries
ondulante.:	wavy.
añadía:	added
guirnalda:	wreath
salvaguardada::	safeguarded:
litúrgico:	liturgical
agregar:	add
decente:	decent
adornarla:	decorate it
firmus:	firm
cantus:	song
situada:	located
Catholici—:	Catholics
—Congaudeant:	- Let them rejoice
compostelano:	compost it
lejanos:	distant
impresionado:	impressed
posibles.:	possible.
aleaciones:	alloys
tenso:	tense
parche:	patch
cuerda:	rope
cobre:	copper
hecho::	made:
vibrante:	vibrant
intervenciones:	interventions
afirmándose:	asserting
recitado:	recited
normales:	normal
períodos:	periods
delimitar:	delimit
puntuación:	score
discretamente:	discreetly
entrarían:	they would enter
Transformado:	Transformed
conditor—:	founder
rerum:	of things
—Aeterne:	-Eternally
ambrosiano:	ambrosian
himno:	hymn
centrado:	centered
así—:	So-
afirmarse:	assert
empezaría:	would start
estribillo:	chorus
medidas:	measures
sucesiones:	successions
irían:	they would go
verbo-génesis.:	verb-genesis.
adjetivo.:	adjective.
necesitaran:	they will need
sustantivos:	nouns
auditorio:	auditorium
adelantara:	will advance
latín.:	latin.
Illa:	Ill
Irae:	of anger
maravilla:	wonder
ocurrió:	occurred
prosodia:	prosody
escansión:	scansion
cantado:	sung
hablado:	spoken
pasara:	passed
impresionista—:	impressionistic-
estilización:	stylization
exageración:	exaggeration
115
:	115
surgiera:	arose
interesaba.:	was interested
vienesa:	viennese
escuela:	school
logros:	achievements
modernos:	modern
armónico;:	harmonic;
sostén:	support
liberarla:	free her
acompañamiento:	accompaniment
enredar:	entangle
cantando:	singing
recitar:	recite
profanas.:	profane.
litúrgicas:	liturgical
repasado:	reviewed
enfocar:	focus
acoplar:	couple
meditado:	meditation
mismo—:	same-
flaqueza:	frailty
alejado:	away
actividades:	activities
estúpidas:	stupid
sueño.:	dream.
impuesto:	tax
pensamiento::	thought:
concretar:	specify
torpezas:	clumsiness
subraya.:	underlines.
delimita:	delimit
enmienda:	amendment
tacha:	blemish
conciencia;:	awareness;
nutre:	nourishes
lucubración;:	lucubration;
delirante:	delusional
inició:	start
goteras:	leaks
lámpara.:	lamp.
sublimado:	sublimate
trabajadas:	worked
gotas:	drops
estéticas:	aesthetic
transferencias:	transfers
descabelladas:	crazy
invenciones:	inventions
adocenadas:	cobbled
fumado:	smoking
mortificante:	mortifying
lúcido:	lucid
adoptar.:	adopt.
incertidumbre:	uncertainty
proyectaba:	projected
Concierto:	Concert
vacilaciones:	hesitations
nacería:	would be born
pautado:	lined
droga:	drug
saliera:	came out
hecho.:	made.
atormentaban.:	they tormented
repentina:	sudden
intelectual:	intellectual
produjo:	produced
cuarta:	quarter
opio::	youth:
fumar:	smoke
Muchos:	Many
entendieran.:	they would understand
leyeran:	they would read
palparan:	squander
haciéndola:	doing it
inscrita:	registered
ordenación.:	ordering
asombrándose:	amazed
cerrados:	closed
«cosa»:	"What"
espíritu;:	spirit;
construido:	built
preciso.:	necessary.
cobran:	they charge
ordenarse:	order
dispersos:	scattered
disgregados:	disintegrated
compactación:	compaction
maduración:	maturation
trabajo::	job:
realizarse:	be realized
todavía—:	still-
—lejos:	-far
noches...:	nights...
arduas:	arduous
doquiera:	everywhere
odioso.:	hateful.
pareciendo:	seeming
huraña:	swearing
114
:	114
atardecer.:	sunset.
llover:	rain
emergencia.:	emergency.
dictado:	dictation
terminar:	finish
ayudado:	helped
invectivas:	invectives
pésimo:	appalling
apuntalable:	propable
apuntalar:	shore
anudado:	knotted
fraguado:	setting
llorar.:	cry.
llenaron:	they filled
fuegos:	fires
encendían:	they lit
lodo.:	official
desconcertados:	bewildered
cobija.:	blanket.
colgarlos:	hang them
colectados:	collected
salvar:	save
comenzó:	began
goteras.:	leaks.
mudando:	changing
resecas:	parched
retumbando:	rumbling
oquedades:	cavities
colándose:	sneaking in
parecieron:	they seemed
bajos:	bass
truenos:	thunder
obertura:	opening
poema.:	poem.
sabrá:	will know
falena:	moth
terciopelos:	velvets
pardos:	brown
alfabeto:	alphabet
descubrirán:	they will discover
consistirán:	they will consist
estética:	aesthetics
preguntarme:	ask me
euritmia:	eurythmy
coreografía:	choreography
Ninguna:	None
brisa.:	breeze.
bambúes:	bamboos
macizo:	solid
torbellino:	whirlwind
alborozan:	exult
vencimientos:	expirations
respiros:	breaths
pausas:	pauses
retornos:	returns
ascendente:	ascending
frondas;:	fronds;
estremecido.:	shuddered
retoños:	shoots
ligeras:	light
rondas:	rounds
organizan:	organize
poseen:	possess
Arboles.:	Trees.
fulgurante:	dazzling
raras:	rare
encienden:	turn on
acude.:	come
recobrada.:	recovered.
flecha:	arrow
disparar:	shoot
entesado:	entangled
incontenible:	irrepressible
llamada:	call
brota:	break
bien.:	GOOD.
desaparecido.:	missing.
plexo:	plexus
latidos:	beats
aprensiones:	apprehensions
desgracias:	misfortunes
presentimientos:	hunches
inmotivadas:	unmotivated
angustias:	anguish
flaccida:	flaccid
traía:	brought
malas:	lazy
estructura.:	structure.
ceñidos:	tight
músculos:	muscles
escueto:	short
esqueleto::	skeleton:
apretando:	squeezing
adelgazado:	slimmed down
pescado:	fish
mañoco:	mancoco
alimentación:	feeding
parca:	park
ruda:	brown
escrita—:	writing—
113
:	113
épico:	epic
gesta:	guests
jirones:	tatters
recoge:	collect
sorbido:	sordid
ritualmente:	ritually
emborracha:	drunk
alianzas:	alliances
memorables:	memorable
duelos:	duels
ardides:	ploys
inventos:	inventions
princesas:	princesses
raptos:	abducted
intervinieron:	they intervened
desviados:	diverted
portentosos:	portentous
héroes:	heroes
levantadas:	raised
victoriosa.:	victorious.
prodigios:	prodigies
arrasa:	rock
caribe:	Caribbean
fragmentos.:	fragments.
reconstruyendo:	rebuilding
epopeya:	epic
descubrí:	I discovered
anotarlo:	write it down
comprenderlo:	understand it
historiador:	historian
botánico:	botanical
geólogo:	geologist
naturalista:	naturalist
ansioso.:	anxious.
paladar:	palate
habituarme:	get used to
pescar:	fish
holgarme:	relax
quemarme:	burn me
comparten:	share
reflexión:	reflection
destino—.:	destination-.
interesarse:	interest
creerán:	will believe
—«por:	-"by
volverá:	will return
Buscador:	Seeker
Estado::	State:
Razón:	Reason
reticencias:	reticence
aceptan:	accept
adivino:	soothsayer
hijo;:	son;
fronterizo.:	frontier.
remacharon:	riveted
grillos:	irons
marcas:	brands
explicaciones:	explanations
descubierto.:	uncovered.
odio:	hatred
dócil:	docile
amistoso:	friendly
humillaciones:	humiliations
maltratos:	abuse
rencor:	rancor
acota:	abound
gente»:	people"
sitio:	place
responde.:	responds.
marcharse»:	leave"
daría:	would give
fiebre.:	fever.
manchan:	stain
viese:	see
Pregunto:	Asked
víbora.:	snake.
encerrado:	closed
echado:	lying
parricida:	parricide
condenaban:	they condemned
espectacular:	spectacular
impresionante:	awesome
castigo:	punishment
instituya:	institute
hambre:	hunger
expulsado:	expelled
condenar:	condemn
vacilará:	will hesitate
pausado:	slow
vedada:	to carry
castigar:	punish
solemnemente:	solemnly
apoyarse:	lean
creando:	creating
sospecharlo:	suspect it
Hombre.:	Man.
jactanciosos:	boastful
bibliotecas:	libraries
escritos:	writings
cientos:	hundreds
instructivos:	instructions
poesía:	poetry
meditación:	meditation
solicitación:	solicitation
raudales—.:	torrents.
arrostrados:	faced
Pobre:	Poor
remanso.:	backwater.
traidora:	traitor
podrido:	rotten
disfrazado:	disguised
artero:	cunning
caimán:	caiman
rugido:	roar
viajando:	traveling
fulminante:	fulminant
mordida:	bite
vampiros:	vampires
112
:	112
cartógrafos:	cartographers
Incógnitas:	Unknowns
Terras:	Lands
planteados:	raised
mayores.»:	older."
necesitarán:	will need
seamos:	let's be
reprobación:	reprobation
dirigirle:	direct you
castiga:	win
responde—:	respond—
instituir:	institute
horroroso:	horrible
inquieta:	restless
castigada»:	punished"
«será:	"it will be
infracción:	infraction
inmediatas:	immediate
realizar:	perform
capitular:	capitulate
reunión:	meeting
remontando:	reassembling
vigilar:	watch
apostar:	bet
acarreo:	haulage
tala:	story
anotadas:	noted
cuestiones:	issues
examen:	exam
concluye:	concludes
conservación:	conservation
tajante:	cutting
urgencia.:	urgency.
debería:	ought
terminada:	finished
dónde.:	where.
moscas:	flies
invasión:	invasion
exasperante:	infuriating
agobia:	overwhelms
pesados:	heavy
cargando:	charging
población:	population
movilizándose:	mobilizing
inicio:	start
ejecutar:	execute
conveniencia:	convenience
unanimidad:	unanimity
reconoce:	recognize
conjurado:	conjured
vertiente.:	slope.
narigón:	nose
trazando:	tracing
lograrse:	be achieved
demasiada:	too much
terrenos:	land
cebolla:	onion
cultivo:	crop
realizado:	carried out
demanda:	demand
batey:	more
inundándose:	flooding
cercana:	close
canalizar:	channel
tendrá:	will have
discutida:	discussed
orientación:	orientation
dirección:	address
aproxima:	approaches
Cabildo:	Council
Actas:	Minutes
Libro:	Book
hacerla:	do it
acatarla:	abide by it
juran:	legal
justificándose:	justifying
mermado:	depleted
inconsiderada:	inconsiderate
manadas:	herds
emigración:	emigration
presentes.:	gifts.
criterio:	criterion
emergencia:	emergency
levantamiento:	lifting
cervatillo:	fawn
hembra»:	female"
absoluta:	absolute
prohibición:	prohibition
instituye:	institutes
ciervas:	deer
cazado:	hunted
comprobado:	checked
Habiendo:	Having
escrito.:	written.
consignados:	consigned
dejarlos:	leave them
provecho:	advantage
número:	number
traseras.:	rear.
guardado:	saved
legislando:	legislating
acentuado:	accentuated
Pertenecientes:	Belonging
colegial:	schoolgirl
tendida:	lying
Sentado:	Sitting
111
:	111
mismas.:	themselves.
empañado:	tarnished
miraban:	they looked
crónica:	chronicle
conjuntivitis:	conjunctivitis
viejas:	old
pupilas:	pupils
pertenecerle:	belong to him
pintadas:	painted
sienes:	temples
pelos:	by the
enmarañada:	tangled
Todavía:	Still
motivos:	reasons
causado:	caused
sentí:	I felt
resignada:	resigned
intensa:	intense
fijaron:	they fixed
inmensamente:	immensely
parajes.:	places.
aventurarse:	venture
consideración:	consideration
burlona:	mocking
permití:	I allowed
Creo:	Believe
Ningún:	No
regiones»:	regions»
sanguinarios:	bloodthirsty
perversos:	wicked
únicos:	unique
«Allí:	"Over there
nudoso::	nude:
sobrecogedora:	overwhelming
hostil:	hostile
sombría:	gloomy
quebrados:	broken
pizarrosos:	slaty
volúmenes:	volumes
respira:	breathe
descenso.:	descent.
iniciará:	will start
rúbricas:	rubrics
frías.:	cold
veamos:	let's see
desciendan:	descend
cumbre:	summit
sorprenda:	surprise
Tenemos:	Have
proximidad:	proximity
acortan:	shorten
contemplación:	contemplation
alucinada:	hallucinated
hombres...:	men...
cobraron:	they charged
nombrados:	named
inhábiles:	unskilled
—obra:	-work
recreadas:	recreated
nombradas:	named
desaparecerán:	will disappear
arrojarme:	throw me
acabaría:	would end
existía:	existed
fascinar:	fascinate
dejara:	will leave
abismos;:	abysses;
invadido:	invaded
demoníaco:	demonic
caldero:	cauldron
Inclinado:	Leaning
diabólica:	diabolical
parar:	to stop
germinan:	germinate
hulla:	corpse
vetas:	veins
petrificado:	petrified
duerme:	sleep
fósil:	fossil
mudo:	period
Prehistoria.»:	Prehistory.”
desiertos:	deserts
saltaron:	they jumped
cordilleras:	mountain ranges
escalaron:	they climbed
atravesaron:	they crossed
servirle:	serve you
negadas:	denied
rebeldes:	rebels
fraile—.:	friar-.
huido:	fled
«Estas:	"It is
formas.:	shapes.
orgiástico:	orgiastic
mostruoso:	monstrous
acoplamiento:	coupling
anuda:	knot
enmaraña:	entangles
enrevesa:	convoluted
tallo.:	three.
desgarre:	tear
erupción:	rash
sanguinolentos:	bloody
pistilos:	pistils
faroles:	lanterns
bulbosas:	bulbous
madrépora:	madrepora
texturas:	textures
submarina:	underwater
tentáculo.:	tentacle.
mórbida:	morbid
membranosas:	membranous
110
:	110
gramíneas:	grasses
pavorosas:	dreadful
medran:	they grow
cráter:	crater
Signos:	Signs
está...:	this...
dejándolo:	leaving it
herramientas:	tools
talladores:	carvers
ejército:	army
levantara:	will lift
gigantesco:	gigantic
erigir:	erect
explicarnos.:	explain to us.
acertamos:	we got it right
mediante:	through
cincel:	chisel
ciclópeo:	cyclopean
lunas:	remedy
arribo.:	arrival.
fijada:	fixed
rúbrica:	rubric
egipcios:	egyptians
arrojó:	daring
retirarse:	withdraw
comenzaron:	they started
encalló:	ran aground
habitantes:	inhabitants
tradición:	tradition
repoblador:	repopulator
dibujos:	drawings
cavados:	dug
alzo:	I get up
aniquilan:	annihilate
sublevados:	uprisings
enrabecidos:	enraged
atruenan:	I'm sorry
apocalipsis:	apocalypse
pavoroso:	dreadful
moler:	grind
ollas:	pans
platos:	dishes
comales:	eat you
tinajas:	jars
muerte;:	death;
rebelan:	they rebel
usados:	used
inventados:	invented
inicial:	initial
endurecer:	harden
suyo:	his
estudioso:	scholar
sorprendiéndome:	surprising me
Brujo.»:	Sorcerer."
Aprendiz:	Apprentice
presentido:	sensed
cosmogonía:	cosmogony
aún::	still:
adivinación:	guessing
fraile—:	friar-
quitchés:	quitches
sagrado:	sacred
desconocido.:	a stranger.
nuestros.:	our.
coincidente:	coincident
cosmogonías:	cosmogonies
emito:	young ones
Admirado:	Admired
rituales:	rituals
festivas:	festive
vestimentas:	garments
Tenochtitlán:	Tenochtitlan
emperadores:	emperors
plumas.:	feathers.
toro:	visiting
caballo:	horse
marcadas:	marked
armaduras.:	armor.
girasoles»:	sunflowers»
«indianos:	«Indians
llamados:	called
pincel:	brush
catalnicas:	catalan
pericos:	parakeets
comadreos:	gossips
asustados:	scared
techos:	roofs
alborotoso:	rowdy
listados:	listed
carpinteros:	carpenters
laboriosidad:	industriousness
conocimos:	we met
alzando:	raising
noche;:	evening;
vestidos:	dresses
paujíes:	paulie's
fosforescente:	phosphorescence
suspensión:	suspension
colibríes:	hummingbirds
Vimos:	We saw
solicitan:	request
¡Dios:	God
gritado::	yelled:
teológico:	theological
soldado:	soldier
luciendo:	showing off
tucán:	toucan
rosadas:	pink
cotorras:	parrots
fastuosos:	lavish
guacamayos:	macaws
escoltaron:	escorted
109
:	109
florecidos—:	flowered—
ricos:	rich
aventada:	suggested
paletadas:	paddles
recogidos:	collected
alud:	avalanche
desprendido:	detached
bizantinos:	Byzantines
mosaicos:	mosaics
gravas:	it matters
molidas:	ground
erosión:	erosion
aridez:	aridity
teratología:	teratology
sacrilego—:	sacrilegious-
intruso:	intruder
vagamente:	vaguely
nieblas.:	fogs.
helada:	frost
arrojo:	daring
surca:	furrow
fieltro:	felt
recortadas:	cropped
derribados:	knocked down
erguidas:	erected
accidentado:	hilly
esquistos:	shales
descansamos:	we rest
llaves:	keys
pagado:	paid
pongan:	put
bultos:	lumps
torturarme:	torture me
hacerles:	make them
suya:	to the water
encargará:	will order
uso.:	use.
enser:	alike
reponer:	replenish
indispensables:	essential
proveerse:	provide
acostumbrado:	used to
enviaré:	I will send
ceño:	frown
desarrugar:	unwrinkle
comprender.:	grasp.
dolida:	hurt
brusco:	abrupt
aparto:	apart
bramido:	bellow
botija:	cylinder
sopla:	blows
resquemores.:	resquemores
desconfianza:	distrust
desertado:	deserted
restos:	remains
enterrar:	bury
romperlos:	break them
sacar:	withdraw
Debería:	Ought
vitrinas.:	showcases.
fichas:	chips
reclamo:	claim
perpetuo:	perpetually
piezas:	parts
hallaran:	cases
plácidamente:	placidly
usurarios.:	usurers
préstamos:	loans
sacrificios:	sacrifices
entregaron:	they delivered
defección:	defection
responsabilidad:	responsibility
aceptará:	will accept
fiador.:	guarantor.
evadirme:	evade
solté:	I blurted out
presencia.:	presence.
castigados:	punished
arrinconarlos:	corner them
sirvió:	served
objetos-acreedores:	creditor-objects
echando:	of winter
atiesaron:	migraines
hinchadas:	swollen
protectoras:	protective
sujetaban:	they held
desaté:	let go
dolorosa.:	painful
acompañó:	accompanied
resonante:	resonant
tambor-bastón-de-ritmo:	drum-rhythm-stick
sugerida:	suggested
ideado:	devised
sonará:	will sound
campanas:	bells
espadaña:	bulrush
ahuecado:	hollow
Colgamos:	We hang up
premonición:	premonition
curvas:	curves
repetido:	repeated
tuviesen:	had
108
:	108
rematada:	finished
viguetería:	joists
amplia:	wide
construir:	build
reunirme:	meet
intelectual.:	intellectual.
quedarme:	stay
cavilaciones.:	overthinking.
pentáfonas...:	pentagons...
gamas:	ranges
generalizada:	widespread
destructoras:	destroyers
bellos:	beautiful
librescas.:	bookish.
aferrados:	clinging
observaciones:	observations
levantarían:	they would lift
polvareda:	dust cloud
falaces:	fallacious
teorías:	theories
sonoro:	sonorous
interpretado:	interpreted
brotan:	sprout
fugas:	leaks
chapuzones:	dips
ronquidos:	snoring
rumores:	rumors
musical-estético:	musical-aesthetic
trino:	triune
gorjeo:	goryeo
imitar:	mock
sostener:	hold
dichas:	said
tonterías:	foolishness
originarse:	originate
alternar:	toggle
obligaba:	forced
fingida:	feigned
cierto;:	TRUE;
originaba:	originated
monosílabo:	monosyllable
emprendía:	undertook
remota.:	remote.
hechicería:	sorcery
derivadas:	derivatives
pervivencia:	survival
arriesgadas:	risky
construyendo:	building
psicología:	psychology
tratados:	treaties
razonamiento:	reasoning
mágico.:	magical.
ultratumba.:	beyond the grave
sierpes:	wyrms
mordeduras:	bites
faraón.:	Pharaoh.
preservar:	preserve
heridas:	wounds
detienen:	stop
persas;:	Persians;
emperador:	emperor
resucita:	resurrect
Esquilo:	Squirrel
Pude:	Could
asistí:	I attended
trote:	trot
remedar:	helper
fijación:	fixation
poderes:	powers
otorga:	grants
primitiva:	primitive
hermanar:	twin
nuestro.:	our.
contemporáneo:	contemporary
religiosas:	religious
curativas:	bandages
cotidiana:	everyday
instituciones:	institutions
albores:	dawn
pretenden:	intend
cuan:	how
absurda.:	absurd.
orígenes:	origins
cestería.:	basketry
trabajan:	they work
primogénito:	firstborn
sentados:	sitting
cálida:	warm
padecidos:	sufferers
vigilancias:	surveillance
prohibiciones:	prohibitions
fealdades:	ugliness
sustraerse:	subtract
inesperado:	unexpected
privilegio:	privilege
disfrute:	enjoyment
causan:	cause
servirlo.:	serve him.
ofrecerles:	offer them
felicidad:	happiness
compañeros:	companions
crueldad:	cruelty
molestado:	bothered
Siempre:	Always
naves.»:	ships.”
encadenarlos:	chain them
héroe—:	hero-
sollozantes:	sobbing
traerlos:	bring them
«Tuve:	"Had
olvidan:	they forget
107
:	107
fruta:	fruit
probar:	prove
lotófagos:	lotus eaters
despacha:	dispatch
sonreír::	smile:
párrafo:	paragraph
tropezando:	tripping
cabellos:	hair
desgaire:	disabled
Recostado:	lying down
inmensa:	immense
torceduras:	sprains
hundiré:	interior
repetirme:	repeat myself
hago.:	do.
mujer.:	women.
formación:	training
apegar:	attach
establecer:	establish
intelectuales:	intellectuals
acomodos:	accommodations
habituarse:	get used to
ciudades.:	cities.
hacinamiento:	overcrowding
vastedad:	vastness
prefiera:	prefer
lindero:	boundary
implica:	implies
determinación:	determination
varón.:	male.
reciba:	receive
recibirá:	will receive
docilidad:	docility
pregonero.:	crier.
menesteres:	necessities
encanallando:	plumbing
azada:	hoe
empuñar:	wield
Prefiero:	Prefer
inútil.:	useless.
agobiarse:	get overwhelmed
cargaba:	loaded
dejarán:	they will leave
tinieblas.:	darkness.
alambre:	wire
ardilla:	squirrel
profesiones:	professions
impuso:	imposed
Sísifo:	Sisyphus
enseñan:	they teach
practican:	they practice
Trataré:	I will try
desierto...:	desert...
predicando:	preaching
enjuto:	lean
canas:	reeds
cubrir:	cover
bañarán:	will bathe
vendrán:	they will come
limalla:	with slime
gruesa:	gross
desembocan:	flow
matriz.:	headquarters.
integrarme:	integrate
límite:	limit
caladas:	quiet
pulsaciones:	pulsations
latido:	beat
seminales:	seminal
conductos:	ducts
endurecen:	harden
nuca:	nut
axilas:	armpits
oscurece:	darkens
pectorales:	pectorals
revienta:	burst
trepa:	climb
testículos:	testicles
calienta:	heats
bañado:	bathed
nanadores:	nandores
muslo:	thigh
ennegrece:	blacken
expuesto:	exposed
asombrados:	amazed
travesura:	mischief
liberamos:	we release
vence:	wins
jadea:	gasp
desnudez:	nakedness
edénico:	edenic
alarde:	parade
ocre.:	ocher.
tiñen:	dye
tanino:	tannin
cauces:	channels
derramarse:	spill
encendidas:	lit
106
:	106
brotando:	sprouting
Pareja:	Couple
desnudos:	nudes
bañamos:	we bathe
pátina:	patina
plancton:	plankton
debiera:	should
especies:	species
complejo:	complex
minúscula:	lower case
vegetales:	vegetables
plateados:	silver
pigmentos:	pigments
líquenes:	lichens
oquedad:	cavity
Asomado:	Leaning
esmalta.:	enamel
cierzo:	north wind
sacuden:	shake
diluirse:	dilute
paredones:	walls
recostadas.:	lying down
acantilado:	cliff
aclaran:	clarify
adelgazan:	lose weight
velos:	fleeces
tendiendo:	tending
Amanece:	dawn
excusa.:	excuse.
cebollas»:	onions»
sembrar:	sow
«Además:	"Besides
Henoch.:	Enoch.
erigirse:	stand up
comenzará:	will begin
rabioso:	rabid
«Alguien:	"Someone
Redención::	Redemption:
agresivo:	aggressive
abruptamente:	abruptly
ramo:	branch
ajustado:	tight
objetar:	object
religiones:	religions
aprendí:	I learned
aprendan:	learn
cuentos:	stories
contarán:	count
distinguir:	distinguish
curas:	cures
viajaban:	they were traveling
naciente:	nascent
variante:	variant
hijos;:	children;
enseñar:	teach
despachó:	dispatch
cesado:	ceased
llovió:	it rained
canoa.:	canoe.
salvó:	except
subir:	rise
hinchara:	will swell
contemplábamos:	we contemplated
dejó:	let
Fundador—:	Founder-
escrúpulos::	scruples:
astrales.:	astral
escorpiones:	scorpions
dibujan:	they draw
izados:	hoisted
—artesanos:	—artisans
desconocidos:	unknown
artesanos:	artisans
105
:	105
aspirar:	aspire
salimos:	we go out
desembarcar.:	disembark.
asaltaron:	assaulted
Henoch»:	Enoch»
vivirse:	live
llegada.:	arrival.
sencillos:	simple
sucesos:	events
promovidos:	promoted
colectiva:	collective
explosiones:	explosions
sequía:	drought
abundante:	abundant
tibieza:	tepidity
contentan:	happy
residencia:	residence
acompañan:	accompany
escama:	scale
veneno:	poison
trajes:	suits
unidades:	units
asignado:	assigned
admiten:	admit
rigores.:	rigors.
Orden:	Order
antemano::	beforehand:
aceptados:	accepted
posibles:	possible
padecimientos:	ailments
renovadas:	renewed
amenazas:	threats
frías:	cold
crueldades:	cruelties
tratable:	tractable
belleza.:	beauty.
fuesen:	were
menosprecio:	disparagement
allá.»:	there."
regresan:	they return
Adelantado—:	Advanced-
«El:	"He
existir.:	exist.
sucumbe:	succumbs
atavismo:	atavism
gangrena.:	gangrene.
impotencia:	impotence
levantados;:	raised;
trabajosamente:	laboriously
venenosos:	poisonous
azotes:	spanking
cartógrafos.:	cartographers.
propia.:	own.
legislar:	legislate
búsqueda:	search
afana:	they are similar
orden.:	order.
cementerio:	cemetery
Señala:	Point out
lápida:	stone
entierra:	buries
Firma:	Business
Gobierno.:	Government.
Levanta:	Get up
traza:	trace
arcadas.:	arcades.
puentes:	bridges
llegue:	I arrived
Puesto:	Position
hablarse:	talk
«fundar»:	"meetings"
verbo:	verb
Siente:	feel
tortugas.:	turtles.
huevos:	eggs
embalsamados:	embalmed
ostensiblemente:	ostensibly
comercia:	trade
suspicacias:	suspicions
apetencias.:	desires.
excesos:	excesses
trastornarlo:	upset it
ignorado:	ignored
invadiendo:	invading
rastro:	trail
seguirle:	follow him
tardarán:	will take
bolsillos:	pockets
apareciendo:	appearing
Piensa:	Think
rocas.:	rocks.
guijarros:	shingle
arrojan:	they throw
mozas:	girls
tardes:	afternoon
baña:	but
prospera.:	prosper.
interesando:	interesting
Poco:	Bit
destetado:	weaned
becerro:	calf
cabra:	goat
atados:	tied
104
:	104
carpintería.:	carpentry.
apero:	conference
posturas:	postures
cambiarlo:	change it
estaño.:	tin.
Encuentra:	Finds
penurias:	hardships
solidario:	supportive
convalecencia:	convalescence
extinción.:	extinction.
numerosa:	numerous
endeble:	flimsy
vástagos:	scions
somos:	we are
piensan:	they think
hierbas.:	herbs.
curan:	cure
funeraria—:	mortuary-
factores:	factors
—gente:	-people
pierna:	leg
engusanada:	to swallow
desemboca:	flows
hambruna.:	famine.
saltamontes:	grasshopper
avispas:	wasps
noventa:	ninety
Camina:	walk
asoma:	appears
habituado:	accustomed
favorecido:	favored
buscadores.:	search engines.
afortunadas:	lucky
insistencias:	insistences
desengaños:	disappointments
miserias:	miseries
comparte:	share
llevado.:	carried.
izan:	be
poblaciones.:	populations.
coloreadas:	colored
zonas:	zones
incansablemente:	untiringly
Cunucunuma:	Conuconuma
obsesionado:	obsessed
libros;:	books;
bañar:	bathe
azahar:	noon
encargan:	they order
nuevos::	new:
aprende:	learn
recetarios:	recipe books
Andando:	Going
lejana.:	distant
domingos:	Sundays
carcomido:	rotten
púlpito:	pulpit
oído:	ear
edad:	age
envidia:	nvidia
parten:	the party
buba:	happen
aliviados:	relieved
curados:	cured
muestras:	samples
preguntan:	they ask
barrunto:	around
enfebrecidos:	feverish
Pasan:	They pass
hartarán:	will be fed up
mirífica:	myrific
arrancaron:	they started
vencidos:	defeated
Llegan:	They arrive
ignorado.:	ignored.
cortinas:	curtains
pasante:	intern
descorriendo:	slipping away
contraído:	contracted
quinina:	quinine
abandonadas:	abandoned
leprosos:	lepers
sarnas:	similarly
rascan:	they scratch
palúdicos:	malaria
tembladeras:	scrapies
añagazas:	tricks
desconfiaran:	they will distrust
andén:	platform
tablas:	tables
bastones:	walking sticks
tientan:	tentan
desembarcadero:	disembarkation
bajan:	they go down
viejos:	old
barcos:	boats
despacioso:	slow
moletas:	knuckles
linaza:	flax
aleros:	eaves
transita:	transit
emético.:	emetic.
tártaro:	Tartarus
raíz:	root
vómica:	vomic
nuez:	nut
casera:	homemade
prescripción:	prescription
confían:	trust
maceraciones:	macerations
enseñaron:	they taught
albergue.:	hostel.
botica:	drugstore
Vencido:	Overdue
cloacas.:	sewers.
carboneras:	charcoal pits
sótanos:	basements
suben:	they go up
jornadas;:	days;
103
:	103
nublada.:	cloudy
Santísimas:	Most Holy
Marías:	Marias
monjas;:	nuns;
hojaldres:	puff pastries
rosarios:	rosaries
maitines:	meals
provincia:	province
Hacia:	Toward
bolas:	balls
rebelde:	rebel
caduceo:	caduceus
emblema:	emblem
batea:	Bataa
adelantaba:	advanced
dieron:	they gave
diré:	I will say
llamarse:	call
apellido:	last name
«Pues:	"Well
rumbos.:	directions.
escucharé:	I will listen
recojan:	pick up
duerman:	sleep
hartado:	treasuredo
beben:	tremble
resina:	resin
burbujeante:	bubbly
articulaciones:	joints
ablando:	softening
intereso:	interest
Ayudo:	Ayuso
invadir:	invade
preguntas.:	questions.
oportunidades:	opportunities
vencidos.:	defeated.
preferentemente:	preferably
sólida:	solid
alienta:	encourages
teniéndose:	having
intransigencias:	intransigence
aspiraciones:	aspirations
interdictos:	interdicts
cánones:	canons
estorbo:	hindrance
fundar:	meeting
inmediato.:	immediate.
formular:	formulate
asados:	roasted
festín:	feast
preparativos:	preparations
empero:	however
aquiescente:	acquiescing
Losada:	slab
fundaron:	founded
distinto.:	distinct.
Ni:	In
eso.:	that.
sorna.:	sarcasm.
raro.:	down.
imponente:	imposing
sugerido:	suggested
confieso:	I confess
hijos.»:	children."
criado:	created
Agustín:	Augustine
parió:	gave birth
fundador::	founder:
acompañado:	accompanied
Gobernador:	Governor
alcalde:	mayor
mestizas:	mixed race
esposas:	wives
bienvenida:	welcome
desborda:	overflows
penalidades:	penalties
increíbles:	incredible
chivatos:	snitches
verracos:	voircos
cabras:	goats
cría:	creates
sembrados:	sown
señalarme:	point me out
terminado:	finished
Catedral.»:	Cathedral."
levantaremos:	we will lift
«Frente:	"Forehead
volviéndose:	turning
indios...»:	Indians..."
bestias...:	beasts...
hijas...:	daughters...
Gobierno...:	Government...
temblor:	shaking
blanquecino.:	whitish.
hogueras:	bonfires
establo.:	barn.
situadas:	situated
ventanas.:	windows.
divisa:	split
doscientos:	two hundred
102
:	102
desconcertado.:	embarrassed.
amarra:	tie
raras.:	rare.
revestido:	coated
recibirlo:	receive it
mansas:	meek
pasándose:	passing
bordeándose:	bordering
calma:	calm
Transcurren:	They pass
exasperantes:	exasperating
respirando:	breathing
fragancias:	fragrances
recobran:	recover
vivas:	lives
somnolencia:	sleepiness
boga:	have
arrulla:	coos
hombre;:	man;
invencida:	invincible
fundarse:	establish
inexploradas:	unexplored
territorios:	territories
Recuesto:	Reclining
órgano...:	organ...
tañedor:	keeper
edificada:	built
horrores:	horrors
sustraiga:	subtract
gobernar:	govern
Crear:	Create
verbo.:	verb.
conjugar:	combine
fundo:	bottom
Fundar:	Meetings
codiciadas.:	coveted.
gemas:	excited
encendiendo:	lighting
repetírmelo:	repeat it
canso:	tired
secreto::	secret:
partido:	party
muelle:	dock
conducirnos:	drive us
angosto:	narrow
bendice:	bless
desengañarla:	undeceive her
suerte.:	luck.
Alborozada:	Exhilarated
hacernos:	make us
Quiere:	Wants
aventureros.:	adventurers.
Micenas:	Mycenae
codicia:	greed
guía:	guide
apegado:	attached
Homero:	Homer
acaieno:	acaien
campesino:	peasant
huellas:	footprints
mentiroso:	liar
manejos:	handling
avaro:	miserly
hallazgo;:	find;
Solitario:	Lonely
alzado:	raised
estatutos.:	statutes.
Cánticos:	Chants
101
:	101
abismo.:	abyss.
vacía:	empty
desordenada:	messy
alabanzas:	praise
sideral:	sidereal
Creador:	Creator
llegaríamos:	we would arrive
retrocediéramos:	we would go back
Creación.:	Creation.
Día:	Day
Cuarto:	Room
señorear:	lord
100
:	100
lumbreras:	luminaries
prueban:	they test
aparecidas:	appeared
vivientes.:	living.
cavernas:	caves
trabaje:	work
abeja:	bee
arborescentes:	tree-like
huya:	come on
Terciario.:	Tertiary.
dragonadas:	dragonades
prehistóricos:	prehistoric
lepidosirenas:	lepidosirens
gimnotos:	Gymnotos
escualos:	sharks
cabezones:	big heads
laulaus:	tables
monstruosos:	monstrous
quedaron:	were left
Abajo:	Below
vedado.:	prohibited.
dominio:	domain
explanadas.:	esplanades.
inmensidad:	immensity
magnas:	big
fausto:	auspicious
sobrecogidos:	overcoected
sentimos:	we feel
hablamos.:	talk later.
planeta.:	planet.
—meteoritas:	— meteorite
coágulos:	clots
rugosos:	rough
peñascos:	boulders
nieblas;:	fogs;
respiran:	they breathe
hendeduras:	crevices
monolitos:	monoliths
crepúsculo.:	dusk.
opalescentes:	opalescent
escarchas:	frosts
soledades:	loneliness
guardan:	they keep
vecinos:	neighbors
lunares:	polka dots
planicies:	plains
escalonamiento:	staggering
cumbres:	summits
adivina:	guess
otros.:	others.
derraman:	spill
estanques:	ponds
dividirse:	be divided
atronadores:	thunderous
acrecidos:	accreted
petrificada.:	petrified
jalonada:	drawn
arcoiris:	rainbow
deshace:	undo
cimera.:	summit
almenaje:	at least
inconmovible.:	immovable.
confabula:	conspires
fantasía:	fancy
severidad:	severity
rompiendo:	breaking
procesión.:	procession.
semejan:	they resemble
corona:	crown
ángulos:	angles
afila:	affiliate
biseles:	bezels
recorta:	crop
flanqueante:	flanking
basalto:	basalt
obelisco:	obelisk
quebrados.:	broken.
rectos:	straight
bruscos:	abrupt
aristas:	edges
morfología:	morphology
cabezas.:	heads.
flancos:	flanks
túneles:	tunnels
conducir:	drive
Puertas:	Doors
madréporas.:	madreporas.
gigantescas:	gigantic
alvéolos:	alveoli
agrietados:	cracked
pirámides:	pyramids
cilindros:	cylinders
majestad.:	majesty.
aplastante:	overwhelming
confiere:	confers
abolengo:	lineage
contemplarlos:	contemplate them
terrestre:	land
alzaron:	raised
telúrica.:	telluric.
tuvieron—:	had—
—cuando:	-when
vestidura:	clothing
Lavadas:	Washed
alzan:	rise
salomas:	Salom
izar:	star
obligados:	obligated
quietos:	quiet
tramos:	sections
navegando:	browsing
subiendo:	going up
Lentamente:	Slowly
crónicas.:	chronicles.
armazón:	warehouse
andamos:	we walk
(Sábado:	(Saturday
99
:	99
Música.:	Music.
Nacimiento:	Birth
asistir:	watch
deslumhrado:	dazzled
treno—:	train-
convulsivamente:	convulsively
estertora:	death rattle
órfico:	Orphic
descorazona.:	disheartens
ablanda:	softens
soltar:	release
niega:	denies
Muerte:	Death
terquedad:	obstinacy
mí...:	my...
ejerce:	exercises
ceremonia:	ceremony
fascinación:	fascination
distancias.:	distances.
mantenerme:	keep me
Trato:	Deal
cálculos:	calculations
atraviesan:	go through
aniquilamiento:	annihilation
—intento:	-tried
imprecatorio:	imprecatory
talones:	heels
vocifera:	vociferous
mudos.:	mute.
pavorosa:	terrifying
prolongarse:	extend
contratiempo:	setback
vibrar:	vibrate
melodía.:	melody.
cortados:	cut
trinos:	trills
ritmo;:	rhythm;
sílabas:	syllables
aullidos;:	howls;
prolongados:	prolonged
guturales:	guttural
portamentos:	behaviors
apremiar.:	press.
sarcasmo:	sarcasm
gime;:	moans;
responden.:	respondents.
alternan.:	they alternate.
destemplada.:	untemplated.
colérica:	choleric
mediano:	medium
vientre.:	belly.
ensalmador;:	salting agent;
cadáver.:	corpse.
imita:	imitate
Palabra.:	Word.
colmo.:	full.
esperan:	wait
expectación:	expectation
preparador:	preparer
Muerte.:	Death.
ahuyentar:	drive away
gente—:	people-
—único:	-single
gravilla:	gravel
calabaza:	pumpkin
sacudir:	shake
mordido:	bitten
sirven:	serve
colgadas:	hanging
amasijo:	I knead
correr.:	run.
echan:	they cast
Dioses...:	Gods...
morada:	household
vasija:	vessel
reverencia:	reverence
torpe:	clumsy
esbozo:	outline
trepadores:	climbers
Viendo:	Seeing
pronunciara:	will pronounce
tiempo»:	time"
«solitaria:	«lonely
Mayores.:	Seniors.
divinidad:	divinity
cobrando:	charging
dados:	data
Niños:	Children
Objeto.:	Object.
naciera:	was born
modelaron:	model kit
abultado:	bulky
prólogo:	prologue
genésico:	genetic
religiones.:	religions.
Dios::	God:
blanda.:	mix.
apoyado:	supported
convexa:	convex
98
:	98
ombligo:	belly button
asas:	basic
endurecida:	hardened
yacen:	lie
bien—:	GOOD-
—cunas:	—cribs
rodean...:	surround...
lamedores:	lickers
tragadores:	swallowers
Nada.:	Nothing.
entes:	loved ones
bestia.:	beast.
carroñas:	carrion
disputen:	they dispute
autorizada:	authorized
predilecta:	favorite
erigidos:	erected
existir:	exist
eréctil:	erectile
humanas:	human
escalafones:	ladders
dueña:	owner
sarcástico—:	sarcastic-
«Cautivos:	«Captives
espanto.:	amazement.
repulsión:	repulsion
producen:	produce
colmillos.:	fangs.
metiéndose:	getting into
servil:	servile
temeroso:	fearful
estúpidamente:	stupidly
sonríen:	they smile
azules:	blue
arrugados:	wrinkled
enanos:	dwarves
nacido;:	born;
vagido:	loved ones
gimotea:	gimme
vivientes:	living
fetos:	fetuses
conocido::	acquaintance:
erguirse:	straighten
roídos:	gnawed
hedionda:	hideous
fangoso:	muddy
hueco:	gap
gesticulación.:	gesticulation.
podríamos:	we could
antemano:	beforehand
comprendiendo:	understanding
semblantes:	countenances
zorros:	foxes
misma.:	same.
comerse:	eat
amasar:	knead
lombrices:	worms
escarban:	dig
liendres:	nits
avispa:	wasp
termes:	terms
pelado:	naked
entremos:	let's enter
región:	region
aislan:	isolate
colgándose:	hanging around
simios:	apes
disputar:	dispute
palmeras:	palm trees
corazones:	hearts
delante:	in front of
sembrar;:	sow;
semilla;:	seed;
valerse:	valese
saberlo:	know it
pudor:	modesty
cobrado:	charged
felinos;:	felines;
ovillan:	at the door
estiran:	they stretch
hinchados;:	swollen;
cuelgan:	they hang
flaccidas:	flabby
mí;:	my;
individuos:	individuals
edades.:	ages.
tenebroso:	dark
edades—:	ages—
más»:	further"
líticos:	lithics
colecciones:	collections
industrias:	industries
paleolítico:	paleolithic
Hemos:	We have
convivimos:	we coexist
compases:	compasses
retrocediendo:	going back
revés:	reverse
leyendo:	reading
cabe:	fits
elaboración:	elaboration
mañanas:	mornings
97
:	97
lapsos:	lapses
percibo:	I perceive
llevadas:	carried
andantes:	walking
—tiempos:	-time
sucedieran:	would happen
breves:	brief
Habla:	Speaks
considerablemente:	considerably
ensanchar:	widen
asombroso.:	amazing.
arrastrar:	drag
poseer:	possess
importancia—.:	importance-.
suponer:	suppose
dejarme:	leave me
delicado:	delicate
defiende:	defend
etapas:	stages
marcaron:	they marked
éstos:	these
vivió:	lived
pasado.:	past.
desmemoriada:	forgetful
Agarra:	Grab
Labán.:	Laban.
Raquel:	Rachel
invocadas:	invoked
«costumbres:	"traditions
pudorosas:	shame
inequívocas:	unequivocal
emplea:	employs
intimidades:	intimacies
alude:	alludes
definidora:	defining
proféticos.:	prophetic.
restando:	staying
sustituyen:	replace
Biblia:	The Bible
traductores:	translators
Tiene:	Has
contrato:	contract
afirmación:	affirmation
diera:	give
situaciones:	situations
definición:	definition
solidez:	solidity
posesivo:	posesive
buscaba»...:	I was looking for...
durmiendo;:	sleeping;
malo:	place
suele:	usually
capacidad:	ability
rebasan:	exceed
mecanismo:	mechanism
grandes»:	big»
«cosas:	"things
regido:	governed
analizando:	analyzing
cuerpo»:	body"
molde:	mould
servir:	serve
ande:	Spirit
arriba.:	above.
alumbra:	lights up
pensó:	thought
'el:	'he
fronteras:	borders
cruzado:	crossed
plenitud:	fullness
propicio:	propitious
prestigioso:	prestigious
remotas.:	remote.
cercanas:	nearby
inquietarse:	worry
adónde:	where to
consentimiento.:	consent.
animoso:	game
pueril:	childish
desaliento:	discouragement
proseguiremos:	we will continue
estambres:	stamens
crujido:	crunch
balanceo:	swinging
colgadizo:	hanging
dormirme:	fall asleep
generación.:	generation.
ello—:	it-
—estoy:	-I'm
imaginada:	imagined
vislumbre:	glimpse
revelada:	revealed
amantes:	lovers
solitarios:	lonely
selvático:	wild
esclavos;:	slaves;
cimarrones:	maroons
hallazgos:	findings
Hablan:	They talk
oírnos.:	eloquent
pudiese:	could
Conozco:	Know
96
:	96
(Jueves:	(Thursday
diligencia:	diligence
encenderlo:	turn it on
incapaces:	incapable
seríamos:	we would be
apagara:	will turn off
abanican:	fan
Historia.:	History.
estadía—:	stay-
—metecos:	—metics
Somos:	We are
dardo:	dart
espina:	thorn
anzuelo:	hook
rascador:	scraper
usan:	they use
inventan:	invent
tósigos:	codes
alimentos:	food
dictan:	dictate
Paleolítica.:	Paleolithic.
bramar:	bellow
lloró:	cry
hueca:	hollow
caña:	cane
soplar:	blow
aldeas:	villages
agricultura:	agriculture
errar:	err
cansado:	tired
—fechas:	—dates
tornaron:	they returned
regresó:	return
Natividad:	Nativity
borróse:	blurry
volvieron:	they came back
Graal:	Grail
Perdió:	lost
números.:	numbers.
lunas.:	remedy.
rellenando:	filling
borraban:	they erased
destranscurrían:	they passed away
vaciaban:	they emptied
guarismos.:	figures.
Medioevo.:	Middle Ages.
concluido:	concluded
Grafías.:	Graphics.
Dómino:	Lord
Benedicamos:	Let us bless
est:	East
líe:	place
espacio...:	space...
estupefaciente:	narcotic
vislumbro:	glimpse
aspiro.:	I aspire.
presente.:	present.
recuperación:	recovery
testimonio:	testimony
barniz:	varnish
aliviaban:	relieved
curanderos:	healers
emplastos:	plasters
calles;:	streets;
baldados:	waste
ciegos:	blind
asado.:	roast.
borracheras:	drunkenness
armar:	arms
gallos:	roosters
preferir:	prefer
cinturón:	belt
prendido:	on
hábitos:	habits
claveteados.:	nailed
portones:	gates
cocinas:	kitchens
baldosas:	tiles
toscas:	rough
cuadros:	paintings
especias:	spices
afición:	hubby
desmedida:	excessive
compartido:	shared
chamuscadas:	singed
lechoncillos:	piglets
trinchado:	carved
museos;:	museums;
jocunda:	funny
servicio:	service
moza:	girl
catar:	Qatar
trago:	I bring
burgueses:	bourgeois
convivido:	lived together
bendición:	blessing
piden:	they ask
orgullosos:	proud
patriarcas:	patriarchs
prostitutas:	prostitutes
—medievales:	—medieval
medievales:	medieval
reverenciar:	bow
Perro:	Dog
trascendentales:	transcendental
alargamiento:	elongation
olla:	be
vestir:	dress
prenda:	garment
calendario:	calendar
pertenecer:	belong
Puede:	Can
temprana:	early
asombrosa::	amazing:
percato:	notice
recientemente.:	recently.
perduran:	they endure
fielmente:	faithfully
Francia:	France
paseos:	walks
diablos:	devils
95
:	95
Medievales:	Medieval
sacrificios.:	sacrifices.
holocausto:	holocaust
parecidos:	similar
usaban:	they used
elegida:	chosen
lanzas:	spears
románica:	Romanesque
basamento:	base
sangrante:	bleeding
templos:	temples
edificar:	build
llevaron:	they carried
románico:	Romanesque
tomadas:	sockets
enlistados:	listed
Descubrimiento:	Discovery
realiza:	perform
renacentista:	Renaissance
Vivimos:	we live
entrado:	entered
esfuman:	vanish
diluyen:	dilute
restan:	remain
cierto.:	TRUE.
bonanza.:	see them.
vientos:	winds
reprendió:	rebuked
levantándose:	getting up
teméis:	topical
¿Por:	By
perecemos;:	we perish;
sálvanos:	scarfed
diciendo::	saying:
despertaron:	they woke up
discípulos:	disciples
dormía:	I slept
mas:	but
ondas;:	waves;
cubría:	covered
monje:	monk
azotadas:	spanked
tiempo—.:	time-.
Entrada:	Prohibited
capellán:	chaplain
miserere:	to pity
Dómine:	Lord
nostri:	our
Miserere:	To pity
savias.:	swordfish.
entres:	come in
morrión:	morion
donadores:	donors
orando:	praying
alimañas:	vermin
fiebres:	fevers
curtidos:	likes
rancio:	rancid
Contratación:	Hiring
algebrista:	algebraist
labriego:	laborer
renegridos:	blackened
flacos:	skinny
arrodillados:	kneeling
Maíz.:	Corn.
Hombres:	Men
Oeste:	West
plantan:	the plant
arribados:	arrived
Descubridores:	Discoverers
retrocedido:	regressed
lejanías.:	distances.
escucharon:	they listened
diferencia:	difference
deslumhra:	dazzles
éramos:	we were
figurarme:	figure
follajes:	foliage
pesaban:	they weighed
hacían:	they did
Troncos:	Trunks
Sanctus:	Saint
triunfantes:	triumphant
entonados:	toned
himnos:	hymns
heroica:	heroic
talados:	felled
hermandades:	brotherhoods
cristiandad:	Christendom
brotadas:	sprouted
cobraban:	they charged
seculares:	secular
inmutables:	immutable
Aquellas:	Those
garganta.:	throat.
sequedad:	dryness
Amén.:	Amen.
Sancti.:	Saints
Spiritus:	Spirit
Filie:	daughter
Patris:	Father's
nomine:	by name
Luego::	Then:
silencio.:	silence.
miedo.»:	fear."
tuviste:	you had
estabas:	you were
tú:	you
«Recuerda:	"Remember
áspero::	rough:
añadió:	he added
apelando:	appealing
mí.»:	my."
hazlo:	do it
quieres:	want
indiferente.:	indifferent.
vieran:	they would see
bautismo;:	baptism;
rehusan:	they refuse
crios.:	belt
chillidos:	shrieking
acallaban:	they silenced
colmillos—.:	fangs.
collares:	necklaces
—todo:	—all
respetuosa:	respectful
observaba:	observed
Aldea:	Village
miraban.:	they looked
mascullando:	masculando
iconos:	icons
94
:	94
prometida:	betrothed
habló:	speak
religión:	religion
tratara:	will try
interrogué:	questioned
Sabiendo:	knowing
sobrecogedor.:	startling.
rituales.:	rituals.
abría:	opened
Purificador:	Purifier
Ara;:	We buy;
Hostia:	Guests
disponerlos:	arrange them
mangas:	sleeves
frotaba:	rubbed
mellados—:	dented—
—algunos:	-some
sacó:	sack
maletín:	briefcase
cuello.:	neck.
plantó:	planted
amarillas.:	yellow.
rebosantes:	overflowing
grosores:	thicknesses
remendado:	patched
encajes:	lace
dispuesto:	willing
gorjeaban.:	gurgle
corro:	I run
danzante:	dancing
ligereza:	lightness
movía:	moved
aldea.:	village.
faenas:	chores
observé:	observed
voces.:	you.
majestad:	majesty
resonaba:	resonated
manifestándose:	manifesting
enormemente:	enormously
madurado:	matured
durmiente:	sleeping
desperezo:	I stretch
transcurso:	course
regresé:	I came back
liberó:	released
Permanecí:	I stayed
parecido:	similar
sopesando:	weighing
separaba:	separated
aboliendo:	abolished
ligado:	connected
estimación:	estimate
crecía:	grew
inscrito:	enrolled
magnífica—:	magnificent—
—pieza:	-part
cumplido.:	compliment.
trofeos:	trophies
palpaba:	Pulp
orgulloso:	proud
justos:	fair
cumplida.:	fulfilled.
ciclo:	cycle
entraba:	came in
creadas:	created
trueques:	barter
concluir:	conclude
primera.:	first.
describiera:	describe
representada:	represented
costados:	sides
encajadas:	fitted
sepultura:	grave
siniestro:	sinister
reviste:	magazines
dotada:	gifted
antepasados:	forefathers
pantanos.:	swamps.
pescadores:	fishermen
botuto:	boot
adornos:	ornaments
cuerno:	horn
trompas:	deceives
atravesada:	crossed
tambores.:	drums.
señalaba:	pointed out
empuñadura:	handle
recorrido:	route
reliquia:	relic
peregrino:	pilgrim
encomendada:	ordered
anafre:	ref
misión.:	mission.
Acababa:	it was over
exclamaciones.:	exclamations.
jubilosas:	jubilant
93
:	93
desempeñado:	performed
eficientes.:	efficient.
tobillos.:	ankles.
sólidos:	solids
ásperos;:	rough;
asir:	captive
utilidad.:	utility.
cabelleras.:	hair
narices:	nose
aguileño:	aquiline
nobleza:	nobility
alzado.:	raised.
enmarcaban:	they framed
maternidad:	maternity
remos;:	oars;
esculpidos:	carved
dorsales:	dorsal
potentes:	potent
movían:	they moved
varones:	men
manejo:	management
disciplina:	discipline
ejercitaban:	they exercised
autoridad:	authority
propiciados:	propitiated
totalidad:	whole
revelaban:	they revealed
maderamen:	wood
recubriendo:	covering
grupo:	group
técnica:	technique
concertada:	concerted
embocaba:	holed
coreógrafo:	choreographer
prestancia:	presence
flechaba:	arrowed
precisión:	precision
soberana:	sovereign
primitivismo.:	primitivism.
vestirlos:	dress them
esenciales:	essential
desconocían:	they did not know
evidencia:	evidence
salvaje.:	wild.
cultura.:	culture.
absolutamente:	absolutely
resultaban:	they turned out
margen:	margin
considerándolos:	considering them
fantasiosos:	fanciful
primordiales.:	primordial.
tareas:	tasks
conocidos.:	acquaintances.
emanación:	emanation
tez.:	quickly.
generaciones:	generations
contribuido:	contributed
recobraba:	recovered
restregar:	scrub
suelto:	loose
pelo:	for the
arrodillarse:	kneel
lavaba:	washed
lechosos:	milky
tubérculos:	tubers
machacaban:	they crushed
píe:	foot
tejían.:	they wove
crios:	belt
agallas.:	guts.
ensartados:	skewered
pescados:	fish
trayendo:	bringing
aparecieron:	appeared
anaranjado:	orange
corrían:	they ran
peonías.:	peonies.
pulsera:	bracelet
diminuta:	tiny
mostrándome:	showing me
inseguras:	insecure
parado:	stopped
orillaban:	they bordered
Varias:	Several
estatura.:	stature.
resigné:	resigned
quebrarse:	break
acababan:	they finished
rebotes:	rebounds
descolgaban:	they picked up
divisaban:	they saw
ensombramiento:	shadowing
definían:	they defined
evanescencias:	evanescence
encajado:	fitted
colgado:	hanging
reflejos:	highlights
razonar:	reason
pasmado:	stunned
Juicio:	Judgment
celebración:	celebration
graderíos:	grades
tronos:	thrones
—morada:	-household
tuberías:	pipes
flanqueadas:	flanked
terrazas:	terraces
vertiginosas:	vertiginous
rematadas:	finished
proporciones:	proportions
granito.:	granite.
hulla.:	corpse.
irisaciones:	iridescence
92
:	92
sombrías:	gloomy
extraña:	strange
cónico:	conical
peñón:	crag
montada:	mounted
arbotantes:	arbutants
ábside:	apse
increíble:	incredible
Formas::	Shapes:
afirmaba:	claimed
cirros:	cirrhosis
reino:	kingdom
parecían:	they seemed
troneras:	enthroned
almenas:	battlements
obsidiana:	obsidian
fortalezas:	strengths
dominadas:	dominated
explanadas:	esplanades
mausoleos:	mausoleums
ciclópeas:	cyclopean
escaleras:	stairs
espaciadas—:	spaced—
múltiples:	multiple
edificaciones:	buildings
titánica:	titanic
proporciones.:	proportions.
renunciar:	give up
analogía:	analogy
contemplando.:	contemplating.
tentaciones:	temptations
ilustradores:	illustrators
alucinados:	hallucinated
fantástico:	fantastic
imaginarias:	imaginary
fabulosos.:	fabulous
plomada:	plumb
tiradas:	shots
verticales:	vertical
flaneos:	flannels
macizas:	solid
alzaban:	raised
gigantescos:	gigantic
asombro.:	astonishment.
librarme:	free me
exclamaciones:	exclamations
estupefacto:	thunderstruck
adolorido:	sore
recordaron:	they remembered
secar:	dry
puestas:	set
brasas.:	embers.
rojiviolados:	red-violet
anchos:	wide
aspadas:	swords
pájaros.:	birds.
canutos:	canutes
aspiraban:	they aspired
polvos:	powder
dispensadora:	dispenser
sabría:	would know
servían:	served
paletas:	pallets
curare:	cure
taparas:	tapar
envenenados:	poisoned
dardos:	darts
carcajes:	quivers
cerbatanas:	blowguns
colgaban:	they hung
nalgas.:	buttocks.
cordón:	cord
sujeto:	subject
oculto:	hidden
amasando:	kneading
probaba:	tried
estómago:	stomach
tremendamente:	tremendously
sorbos:	sips
llevara:	will carry
resfrío:	cold
agotamiento:	exhaustion
indios;:	Indians;
caminata:	hike
desembarco:	landing
Recordé:	I remembered
leña.:	firewood.
Olía:	Oil
delgada.:	slim.
paja:	straw
estera:	foreign
acostado:	lying down
comprendí:	I understood
largamente:	widely
bebí:	I drank
cántaro:	pitcher
agarré:	grip
Después:	After
(Miércoles:	(Wednesday
Prueba.:	Proof.
Segunda:	Second
un::	and:
saberme:	know me
varadero:	slipway
descansa:	rest
nerviosa:	nervous
Agotado:	Exhausted
remoto.:	remote.
Desarrugando:	Unwrinkling
orillas.:	shores.
ranas:	frogs
prolongado:	prolonged
tremebunda:	trembling
rayos:	good heavens
bordas.:	edges.
afincando:	settling
pararse:	stop
91
:	91
inacabable.:	unending
Prosigue:	Continue
remos.:	oars.
defendiéndonos:	defending ourselves
arroje:	throw
cinturones:	belts
entereza.:	fortitude.
cráneo:	skull
resguarda:	protects
reguardando:	looking at
apretados:	tight
embarcación:	vessel
dirige:	directs
Acrece:	increases
llover.:	rain.
quilla.:	keel.
chillan:	they scream
torturadas:	tortured
maderas:	woods
vuelco:	overturn
sesgándonos:	biasing us
redondas:	round
montando:	riding
picando:	stinging
embarcaciones:	boats
equilibrio:	balance
Dominando:	Dominating
olvidarlo:	forget it
circunda.:	surrounds.
sobreponerme:	get over
Perdida:	Lost
zarandea:	you are
tumulto:	riot
salvación:	salvation
corrientes:	currents
obstáculos:	obstacles
cercanía:	closeness
mostrarme:	show me
repentino:	sudden
aerolitos:	Aerosol
cataclismo:	cataclysm
bullentes:	bubbling
marañas:	tangles
tenebrosa:	dark
deslindada:	delimited
parpadeante:	flickering
reaparecidos.:	reappeared.
hunden:	the dog
abriéndose:	opening
enfrente:	opposite
desprende:	detaches
alumbrar:	light
seguimiento:	follow-up
enciende:	turn on
tormenta.:	storm.
bramante:	longing
torbellinos:	whirlwinds
sueltan:	they release
turbamulta:	a lot of trouble
resistencia:	endurance
bastón.:	cane.
canoas:	canoes
arrumbando:	breaking in
afianzado:	entrenched
Tomando:	Taking
peligrosamente:	dangerously
llevándole:	taking him
prenderse:	catch
remolinos:	swirls
atormentado:	tormented
anchura:	width
distintos.:	distinct.
acantilados:	cliffs
minero.:	miner.
reanudarse:	resume
curiaras.:	would you like
acurrucados:	snuggled
bastonazos:	caning
reaparece:	reappears
huida.:	flight.
arrieros:	muleteers
epíteto:	epithet
conminatoria:	injunction
misionera:	missionary
digo.:	I say.
fechas»:	dates»
revés.:	reverse.
andarse:	walk away
refiere:	refers
ángeles:	angels
asustando:	scaring
estática:	static
Doctora:	Doctor
hereje:	heretic
pirata:	pirate
90
:	90
degollados:	beheaded
frailes:	friars
paraguayas:	paraguayan
saetas:	arrows
Lizardi:	Lizard
torturado:	tortured
bárbaramente:	barbarously
beato:	blessed
Marañón;:	Cashew;
despedazados:	torn to pieces
padres:	parents
desconocida;:	unknown;
contarme:	tell me
otros.»:	others."
«Para:	"To
abrupto::	abrupt:
corta:	short
templo.:	temple.
indignos:	unworthy
sacerdotes:	priests
apoyar:	support
serle:	be him
apostolado:	apostleship
ermitaño:	hermit
tarado:	crazy
ocioso:	idle
singularmente:	singularly
parecer:	opinion
urbano:	urban
clero:	clergy
—pienso:	-I think
exclama:	exclaims
caballería»:	chivalry"
infantería:	infantry
rivalidad:	rivalry
eterna:	eternal
pulpito.:	pulpit.
tenores:	tenors
nunciaturas:	announcements
rumiantes:	ruminants
indulgencias:	indulgences
vendedores:	sellers
califica:	qualify
mundanos:	worldly
párrocos:	parish priests
acremente:	add
ara:	We buy
pompas:	pomp
creó.»:	believe."
honrar:	honor
sirvan:	serve
materias:	materials
hermosas:	beautiful
—responde:	—replies
justo:	fair
«Porque:	"Why
custodias:	the guards
pedrería:	rhinestones
relumbran:	they shine
enmarañadas:	tangled
cejas:	eyebrows
sonríe:	smile
ofenderse.:	be offended.
fabuloso:	fabulous
malestar:	discomfort
Oigo:	I hear
precioso.:	precious.
cegar:	blind
llamamos:	we call
diamantes.:	diamonds.
acaudalar:	affluent
alejó:	moved away
desentumecer:	loosen up
boscosa:	wooded
Aprovechándose:	Taking advantage
martes):	mars)
(Tarde:	(Afternoon
confluencias.:	confluences
presidieran:	in the presidency
inmemoriales:	immemorial
edificadas:	built
detenidas:	detained
enlazadas:	linked
Esas:	Those
alfarero.:	potter.
redondearse:	round off
monumentales:	monumental
desgastado:	worn out
Génesis;:	Genesis;
ricas:	rich
amasan:	goals
olvidadas:	forgotten
nubes::	clouds:
descubría:	discovered
asombroso:	amazing
indecencias:	indecencies
travesuras:	antics
frondas:	fronds
escandalizaban:	scandalized
monos:	monkeys
alegres:	happy
proliferación:	proliferation
barroca:	baroque
simulacros:	drills
apariencias:	appearances
barajarse:	shuffle
milagro.:	miracle.
colibrí:	hummingbird
vibración:	vibration
universo:	universe
frágil:	fragile
pescador:	fisherman
mentía:	lied
blancas.:	white.
levantaban:	they raised
garzón:	waiter
interrogación:	question
inventaban:	invented
jornada:	day
Autana:	Autoana
efectivamente:	indeed
Signo:	Sign
fundación:	foundation
permanecer:	remain
Penélope.:	Penelope.
diamantes:	diamonds
él.:	he.
inmenso:	immense
buscadores:	search engines
cuarzos:	quartz
abril:	April
bajado:	lowered
remos:	oars
botador:	bouncer
bogar:	arcs
impaciencia.:	impatience.
incisión:	incision
primero:	first
respondiendo:	responding
terminaron:	they finished
disponer:	provide
trascendencia:	transcendence
fríos:	cold
ansioso:	anxious
finjo:	I pretend
griegos.:	Greeks.
comenta:	comment
estuve:	I have been
dueño:	owner
tarda:	afternoon
navegar:	browse
tienda:	store
cubierto:	covered
imaginar:	imagine
desollado:	desolate
tomé:	Thomas
Hasta:	Until
preguntas:	questions
matadores:	matadors
mutilado:	mutilated
recientemente:	recently
bravios:	brave
Hidra:	Hydra
—en:	-in
Navio:	Ship
agorero:	doomsayer
pinturas:	paintings
salón:	salon
suficiente:	enough
empeño:	endeavor
aturdirse:	stun
rápidamente:	quickly
enojado:	angry
Padrenuestro:	Our Father
subirse:	get on
blandura:	softness
sobresalta:	startles
convergencia:	convergence
enteros:	whole
extremos:	extremes
colillas:	butts
estaré:	I will be
huelen:	take
albergue:	hostel
hastiado:	jaded
abro:	I open
terreno.:	land.
quedó:	remained
indefinidamente:	indefinitely
alarga:	lengthens
perder:	lose
abogado:	lawyer
corazón:	heart
figura.:	figure.
revista:	magazine
podido:	could
Porvenir.:	Future.
Recuerdos:	Memories
taberna:	bar
corren:	they run
letras:	lyrics
Apocalipsis:	Apocalypse
transcurrido:	elapsed
abuso:	abuse
ennoblecidos:	ennobled
estrechez:	narrowness
meros:	heritage
consiste:	consists
quieren:	they want
enseña:	teaches
Venusberg:	Venus mountain
precisamente:	precisely
vivirlo:	live it
cemento:	cement
órdenes:	orders
vivienda.:	dwelling.
pública:	public
vivienda:	dwelling
automatismo:	automatism
guirnaldas:	garlands
haba:	length
escucha:	listen
presentes:	gifts
penumbras:	shadows
multitud:	crew
ancha:	much
cruzan:	cross
leves:	light
llorar:	cry
plantada:	planted
tenerme:	have me
yeso:	and so
decoración:	decoration
habría:	there would be
indulgencia:	indulgence
escucharme:	listen to me
tránsito:	transit
engañados:	deceived
perenne:	perennial
encuentros:	meetings
precisa:	it needs
inmovilizada:	immobilized
máscaras:	masks
paludismo:	malaria
afirmando:	stating
hábil:	skillful
lectura:	reading
biblioteca:	library
Entre:	Between
deseos:	wishes
aquí.:	here.
crueles:	cruel
espera.:	wait.
galería:	gallery
arañas:	spiders
observo:	noticed
recepción:	reception
conviven:	coexist
borracho:	drunk
presidente:	president
espejos:	mirrors
sollozos:	sobs
intimidad:	privacy
acude:	come
suelen:	they usually
leyendas:	legends
centenares:	hundreds
peores:	worst
vender:	sell
cuartillas:	quarters
Ese:	That
repasando:	reviewing
oír:	hear
creí:	I believed
reunirse:	meet up
pista:	track
cautivo:	captive
explorador:	explorer
sufre:	suffer
sacarme:	take me out
excusa:	excuse
conyugal;:	conjugal;
virtud:	virtue
irrita:	irritates
plácido:	placid
elogios:	compliments
explicó:	explained
comunión:	communion
fotografías:	photographs
víspera:	eve
ignorada:	ignored
actualidad:	present
patética:	pathetic
zona:	area
pidió:	asked
exploradores:	explorers
tuvo:	had
apartamento:	apartment
dramática:	dramatic
publicaciones:	publications
rodea:	surrounds
creía:	believed
suburbios:	suburbs
seis:	six
vivido:	vivid
índices:	indexes
nacer:	be born
jarras:	jugs
mando:	command
hablo:	speak
callarme:	shut up
sentía:	felt
amigos:	friends
tocara:	will touch
llevaría:	would take
culpas:	blame
víctima:	victim
vínculo:	bond
haberme:	have me
regresaré:	I will return
Dentro:	Within
plena:	full
ofrecida:	offered
maleta:	suitcase
cuadernos:	notebooks
expresar:	express
marchar:	leave
ponen:	they put
aguarda:	wait
acontecimiento:	event
hacerse:	become
sendero:	path
cierran:	they close
aluminio:	aluminum
cantimplora:	canteen
telas:	screens
cruzarse:	cross
admiro:	admire
área:	area
pilotos:	pilots
premio:	award
incluye:	includes
prisionero:	prisoner
Alguien:	Someone
contacto:	contact
repite:	repeat
pesado:	heavy
regresa:	come back
volaban:	they flew
seguidos:	followed
muros:	walls
Dos:	Of the
salía:	went out
hundía:	sank
ojos.:	eyes.
arrodillado:	kneeling
Petroglifos:	Petroglyphs
marcaban:	they marked
seña:	sign
igualmente:	also
atropello:	run over
experiencia:	experience
dije:	said
umbral:	threshold
brotado:	sprouted
acariciar:	stroke
ansias:	craving
buscamos:	we seek
cosas.:	things.
bruma:	Hoar
confundidos:	confused
fomento:	promotion
reglas:	rules
padecer:	suffer
torrente.:	torrent.
pintan:	they paint
hongos:	fungus
agobio:	burden
aparece:	appears
aligerando:	lightening
excitación:	excitement
vuelva:	come back
trabajando:	working
Sigo:	I continue
acabar:	end
ir:	and
terminen:	the semester
cortezas:	crusts
trataba:	tried
leproso:	leper
esperando:	waiting
caverna:	cave
guarda:	guard
¡Vete:	¡Alone
pedazos:	pieces
agitando:	waving
llanto:	crying
agujero:	hole
antigüedad:	antique
lepra:	leprosy
oyendo:	hearing
mueve:	moves
licor.:	liqueur.
engaño:	deception
quita:	remove
atadura:	tie
casamiento:	marriage
transforma:	transform
dominical:	Sunday
festiva:	festive
realmente.:	really.
consumado:	consummated
imagen:	image
quién:	who
pensé:	think
despecho.:	spite.
resquemante:	resequent
abandonar:	abandon
haciéndome:	making me
aprovechar:	leverage
fibra:	fiber
establecida:	established
pasará:	will pass
lamento:	I regret
sumamente:	extremely
arduo:	arduous
trato:	deal
zozobra:	anxiety
veré:	I will see
temor:	fear
suscrita:	subscribed
espectáculo:	show
aceptar:	accept
llevada:	carried
comedia:	comedy
Podría:	Could
tribunales:	courts
principios:	beginning
desafiante:	challenging
prorrumpo:	I burst out
nupcial:	bridal
cromo:	chrome
personajes:	characters
cayado:	crook
violencia:	violence
irónica:	ironic
reacción:	reaction
legales:	legal
obligación:	obligation
ajena:	alien
Medievo:	Medieval
guitarra:	guitar
libretas:	notebooks
«Te:	"The
papel.:	paper.
cuaderno:	notebook
sorpresa.:	surprise.
tregua:	truce
Sé:	See
facilidad:	ease
consignas:	slogans
inspiración:	inspiration
colocados:	placed
recuperar:	recover
espontaneidad:	spontaneity
ahora.:	now.
gráfica:	graphic
irregularmente:	irregularly
página:	page
lápiz.:	pencil.
discantus:	students
pondrá:	will put
traído:	brought
discurso:	speech
muerte.:	death.
vacas:	cows
regrese:	come back
Libación:	Libation
bastaba:	it was enough
rincón:	corner
arruga:	wrinkle
respondo:	answer
escándalo:	scandal
lleno:	full
ponerme:	put on
opuesto:	opposite
retórica:	rhetoric
morado:	purple
Vidas:	Lives
menudo:	slight
inglés:	English
confesión:	confession
ministerio:	ministry
textos:	texts
rodean:	surround
versos:	verses
Ciertos:	Some
mentalmente:	mentally
tercio:	third
Prometeo:	Prometheus
pentagramas:	staves
esbozar:	outline
empiezo:	start
entrega:	delivery
—que:	-what
contemplaba:	contemplated
—forma:	—shape
ennegrecido:	blackened
hechicero:	sorcerer
poblado:	populated
inteligentes:	smart
músicos:	musicians
pocos:	few
armonía:	harmony
referencia:	reference
desconfiar:	distrust
concepción:	conception
lograr:	achieve
polifonía:	polyphony
puros:	cigars
pasaba:	was passing
restaba:	remained
colgada:	hung
directamente:	directly
darle:	give
tropo:	trope
encuadrar:	frame
sencillez:	simplicity
cuidado:	Careful
entonación:	intonation
elocuencia:	eloquence
reclamar:	complain
haciéndose:	making
paroxísticos:	paroxysmal
exasperados:	exasperated
compositores:	composers
inflexiones:	inflections
diciendo:	saying
recitativo:	recitative
problema:	problem
incitación:	incitement
necesaria:	necessary
burbujeantes:	bubbly
sonidos:	sounds
imposibles:	impossible
resuelto:	resolved
imaginado:	imagined
siguiente:	following
molesta:	bothers
pluma:	feather
tendría:	would have
creación:	creation
euforia:	euphoria
informes:	information
cariño:	dear
acontece:	it happens
abrazar:	embrace
vez.:	time.
húmedas:	wet
sostienen:	hold
vigas:	beams
pasamos:	we passed
socavones:	sinkholes
Llueve:	It's raining
manchado:	stained
caracol:	snail
simplemente:	simply
superiores:	superiors
Llego:	Arrive
dibuja:	draw
viento.:	wind.
descubierto:	uncovered
cerca.:	fence.
apremio:	pressure
acerco:	approach
metida:	stuck up
ocurrir:	occur
demasiado.:	too much.
oscuramente:	darkly
unidad:	unit
combates:	fighting
oscura:	dark
explicar:	explain
etnógrafo:	ethnographer
reposo:	repose
novedad:	novelty
creada:	created
«Este:	"It is
aparecer:	to appear
haría:	would
mitos:	myth
inteligente:	intelligent
crótalo:	crotalus
problemas:	problems
numerosos:	numerous
llegará:	will arrive
haciéndosele:	making him
«Hasta:	"Until
castigos:	punishments
hombrecito:	little man
ultimo:	last
latines:	Latin
inmediato:	immediate
recuerda:	remember
salidas:	Departures
valladar:	fence
respondía:	responded
explicaciones.:	explanations.
severamente:	severely
granos.:	grain.
efecto:	effect
canteros:	stonemasons
públicas.:	public.
considerar:	consider
comarca:	district
sentado:	sitting
Responsable:	Responsible
portada:	front page
libreta:	notebook
horcón:	pitchfork
enrojecidas:	reddened
desconcertado:	embarrassed
tristes:	sad
ingratos:	ungrateful
contempla:	contemplate
mediodía.:	average.
obeliscos:	obelisks
cayado.:	crook.
ligero:	light
dándome:	giving me
espesor:	thickness
hundirme:	inside
rodeaba:	surrounded
vegetación:	vegetation
contrario:	contrary
humanos:	humans
fecha:	date
viviendo:	living
contemplar:	contemplate
alimento:	food
firmemente:	firmly
atacar:	attack
estrellas:	stars
bestias:	beasts
hubo:	was
mundo.:	world.
vencedor:	winner
ladridos:	barking
dan:	And
máquina:	machine
trágica:	tragic
—afirma:	—states
«En:	"In
leído:	read
opinión:	opinion
flautas:	flutes
mitologías:	mythologies
serpiente:	snake
volante:	steering wheel
advocación:	dedication
civilizaciones:	civilizations
tuvieron:	they had
vertiginosa:	vertiginous
pensamientos:	thoughts
pájaro:	bird
esmalte:	enamel
limpios:	clean
hubiesen:	they would have
escorias:	slag
calcedonias:	chalcedony
milenaria:	millennial
arcano:	arcane
rompe:	breaks
—un:	— and
escombros:	debris
filos:	edges
ascendido:	promoted
evasión.:	evasion.
correo.:	mail.
hermana:	sister
dañado:	damaged
enojo.:	anger.
venido:	come
ausente:	absent
asiento:	seat
seguramente:	surely
pertenecen.:	they belong.
acusadora:	accuser
funeraria:	mortuary
éstas:	are
fabricación:	manufacturing
líneas:	lines
figuración:	figuration
ventanas:	windows
puntiagudo:	pointed
cabaña:	cabin
zafarme:	get away
singulares:	singular
escalas:	scales
útil:	useful
oficio.:	job.
entendimiento:	understanding
código:	code
constantemente:	constantly
práctica:	practice
repetición:	repetition
él;:	he;
hipótesis:	hypothesis
llegaron:	they arrived
ésos:	those
dijeron:	they said
tesis:	thesis
confirma:	confirm
nacimiento:	birth
animales.:	animals.
galope:	gallop
debida:	due
representación:	representation
plástica:	plastic
ingeniosa:	ingenious
prehistórico:	prehistoric
situarse:	situate oneself
especulaciones:	speculations
vanas:	old
teoría:	theory
físico:	physical
encuentran:	find
irritación:	irritation
relato:	report
bancos:	banks
alegría.:	happiness.
estará:	will be
entera:	whole
serán:	will be
claridades:	clarities
quedo:	stay
ahora—:	now-
entrañablemente:	endearingly
conocido.:	acquaintance.
distinto:	distinct
hermanas:	sisters
nacida:	born
comprendido:	understood
ceniza:	ash
huyendo:	fleeing
vengo:	come
aprender:	learn
tomado:	taken
traje:	lasts
cueros:	leathers
mármol.:	marble.
añoranza:	yearning
buscan:	search
sudor:	sweat
columna:	column
conservan:	preserve
franja:	fringe
muere:	die
brisa:	breeze
limpia:	clean
fingimiento:	pretense
estanque:	pond
cavado:	dug
caída:	drop
árbol.:	tree.
disputan:	they dispute
vegetaciones:	vegetations
abajo.:	below.
escala:	scale
musgos:	mosses
contemplo:	I contemplate
ocultarse:	hide
brumas:	mists
refleja:	reflects
demoran:	delay
redonda:	round
menester:	need
Noés:	Noah
mismos:	themselves
«Ya:	«Yes
yerbas.:	herbs.
sabía:	knew
desconocidas:	unknown
regiones:	regions
consideraba:	considered
sabían:	they knew
patraña:	humbug
—por:	-by
patas.:	paws.
gigantesca:	gigantic
petroglifos:	petroglyphs
enseñado:	taught
narrarle:	narrate
—cuenta:	-account
explicación:	explanation
andamiaje:	scaffolding
tambores:	drums
cantos:	songs
motivo:	reason
destinos:	destinations
hoguera:	bonfire
conocidos:	acquaintances
creado.:	created.
sobresaltos:	shocks
consideran:	consider
circunda:	surrounds
empeños:	pawns
auténticas:	authentic
sobrellevar:	endure
hambruna:	famine
inundación:	flood
pretende:	intend
nacieron:	were born
orquídeas:	orchids
burlar:	cheat
polvo:	dust
apremio.:	pressure.
inventar:	inventory
semillas:	seeds
rodean.:	surround.
trabajos:	jobs
vías:	ways
vieron:	they saw
asentada:	seated
dejando:	leaving
rencores:	grudges
Durante:	During
sueña:	sounds
ignorados:	ignored
bombonas:	candy
yacimientos:	deposits
rumbo.:	course.
llaga:	sore
examinando:	examining
habitaciones:	rooms
llave:	key
mujeres.:	women.
dónde:	where
traen:	they bring
gema:	echo
llegan:	they arrive
azufre:	sulfur
podridas:	rotten
vienen:	they come
laboratorio:	laboratory
recetas:	recipes
enfermo:	sick
adolescente:	adolescent
crecidas:	floods
canta:	sing
cura:	treatment
viejos.:	old
farmacia:	pharmacy
llenas:	full
caserío:	hamlet
sabor:	flavor
fardo:	burden
echa:	cast
impide:	prevents
leña:	firewood
interrogaciones:	interrogations
«Así:	"So
llamaba:	called
vecindario:	neighborhood
traídos:	brought
cerdos:	pigs
inicia:	starts
cercado:	surrounded
granos:	grain
tenemos:	have
«Esta:	"This
voz::	voice:
construcción:	construction
limpiado:	cleaned
Venados.:	Deer.
portento:	portent
laberintos:	labyrinths
podrían:	could
regazo:	lap
Época:	Era
mapas:	maps
Fundador:	Founder
proseguimos:	we continue
tiende:	tends
ropa:	clothes
teniendo:	having
precioso:	precious
nosotros.:	us.
conocedor:	connoisseur
borrando:	erasing
compartir:	share
minero:	miner
despide:	say goodbye
señalando:	pointing
CAPITULO:	CHAPTER
incienso:	incense
comenzara:	will begin
Génesis:	Genesis
apartarse:	depart
helechos:	ferns
legado:	legacy
cargan:	they load
saurios:	saurians
arrojados:	thrown
llenan:	fill
helados:	ice cream
fondos:	funds
holladas:	trampled
vírgenes:	virgins
espumas:	foams
cornisa:	cornice
granito:	granite
arabesco:	arabesque
creado:	created
terraza:	terrace
farallón:	cliff
adorna:	adorns
meseta:	plateau
ahondan:	they delve
desconocido:	a stranger
misteriosa:	mysterious
parados:	stopped
cuarzo:	quartz
cristales:	crystals
bronce:	bronze
inmensos:	immense
impar:	odd
vejez:	old age
pudieran:	could
elementalidad:	elementality
grandiosa:	great
reducidas:	reduced
desnuda:	naked
peldaño:	step
compás:	compass
salto:	jump
caños:	pipes
migraciones:	migrations
oscuras:	dark
Historia:	History
olvidados:	forgotten
planeta:	planet
Hace:	Does
dejándome:	leaving me
ensalmador:	salamander
Palabra:	Word
presa:	taken
horrenda:	horrible
sustraerme:	steal away
hombre—.:	man-.
potencias:	powers
profunda:	deep
desgarrado:	torn
encara:	still
vocalización:	vocalization
ignora:	ignore
jadeo:	panting
adentro:	inside
ronquido:	snore
lengua:	language
embrión:	embryo
llegando:	arriving
repiten:	they repeat
gaznate:	fizzy
increpa:	rebukes
nocturnos:	nocturnal
ensalmo:	I praise
mandatarios:	representatives
hinchado:	swollen
acaban:	end
respetar:	respect
miran:	another
empreñadas:	engaged
hembras:	females
preparándose:	getting ready
hembra:	female
principio:	principle
Dios.:	God.
estuviese:	was
hoyos:	holes
aullidos:	howls
buitres:	vultures
dejados:	left
roer:	stir
sepan:	know
último.:	last.
vértigo:	vertigo
Siento:	I feel
legítima:	legitimate
movido:	moved
Tal:	Of
anatómicas:	anatomical
asomarme:	look out
coincidencia:	coincidence
admitiendo:	admitting
Contemplo:	I contemplate
perros.:	dogs.
uñas:	nails
gusanos:	worms
tragan:	swallow
devoran:	devour
techumbres:	roofing
comiendo:	eating
energía:	energy
pecado:	sin
desnudas:	naked
órganos:	organs
ocultar:	disguise
ubres:	udders
Esos:	Those
retroceder:	back
entrar:	to enter
paralelas:	parallel
—de:	-of
atardecer:	sunset
derecha:	right
atónito:	amazed
dilatación:	dilatation
hora—:	time—
preocupa:	worries
—ahora:	-now
tuviese:	had
largos:	long
tránsitos:	transits
dignidad:	dignity
Muy:	Very
preguntar:	ask
hato:	there
adonde:	where to
lleve:	carry
mujeres»:	women"
expresiones:	expressions
ignorar:	ignore
simplificación:	simplification
fragor:	roar
esposa.:	wife.
reiteración:	reiteration
refiriéndose:	referring
humano.:	human.
atravesar:	cross
particularmente:	particularly
noción:	notion
importa:	matter
preocupación:	worry
fatiga:	fatigue
temo:	theme
acompasado:	rhythmic
leve:	live
maravillado:	amazed
quedé:	I stayed
hombres.:	men.
vean:	see
gineceo:	gynoecium
imaginan:	imagine
atribuyen:	attribute
cuidando:	caring
confió:	trusted
ignorantes:	ignorant
forasteros:	outsiders
intrusos:	intruders
hueso.:	bone.
cuchillo:	knife
técnicas:	techniques
Quienes:	Who
necesitado:	needy
fijar:	set
inventó:	invention
alcanzamos:	we reach
crecer:	grow
Anunciación.:	Annunciation.
Cero:	Zero
Año:	Year
cayeron:	they fell
relumbre:	glare
cifras:	figures
devolviendo:	returning
calendarios:	calendars
perdiendo:	losing
seguían:	they followed
conocía:	knew
bálsamos:	balms
echar:	throw
plectro:	plectrum
suelta:	loose
bailar:	dance
Conocía:	I knew
tetas:	tits
soñar:	dream
hijos:	children
parroquia:	parish
viajan:	they travel
Caballo:	Horse
Aguinaldos:	bonuses
atravesado:	crossed
pelear:	fight
tenazas:	tongs
vestida:	dressed
pasando:	passing
puertas:	doors
Mundo:	World
antes.:	before.
retroceso:	recoil
llegándose:	arriving
Acaso:	Chance
detiene:	stops
nostri.:	our.
soldados:	soldiers
migración:	migration
siglos.:	ages.
misas:	masses
ninguna:	none
divertido:	fun
ídolos:	idols
adoradores:	worshipers
llenos:	full
Sobre:	On
catedrales:	cathedrals
subterráneos:	underground
solemnidad:	solemnity
portentosa:	portentous
dolorosa:	painful
barcas:	boats
mí::	my:
volvió:	came back
pasó:	passed
mirada.:	look.
situaba:	situated
Cáliz:	Chalice
herrumbres:	rust
mordidos:	bitten
litúrgicos:	liturgical
consigo:	with you
raído:	raido
colgaba:	hung
jicaras:	jikaras
saliendo:	leaving
entrando:	entering
roto:	inside
inhabitual:	unusual
alboroto:	riot
contrapunto:	counterpoint
medida.:	measure.
confiado:	confident
distancia:	distance
excepcional:	exceptional
deleitosamente:	delightfully
realmente:	really
alcanzado:	reached
pareció:	it seemed
pusieron:	they put
cañas:	white hair
resonancia:	resonance
desagradable:	disgusting
gravedad:	gravity
órgano.:	organ.
condición:	condition
Ahí:	There
extraviados:	lost
emplumada:	feathered
primitivo:	primitive
ornamentado:	ornate
cilindro:	cylinder
puse:	side
países:	countries
alcanza:	reaches
colección:	collection
término:	term
viaje::	journey:
llamándome:	calling me
apareció:	appeared
dirigía:	directed
inútiles:	useless
esqueleto:	skeleton
cumplido:	compliment
espesura:	thickness
caderas:	hips
fuertes:	strong
severa:	severe
mozos:	guys
humano:	human
fibras:	fibers
éste:	this
necesarias:	necessary
dueños:	owners
situados:	situated
Aquellos:	Those
ocupaciones:	occupations
entregado:	delivered
impresión:	impression
aclarar:	clarify
pasadas:	passed
mías.:	mine
ancianas:	old women
pezones:	nipples
acercó:	approached
negras.:	black.
remanso:	backwater
agobiado:	overwhelmed
Casi:	Almost
árboles.:	trees.
copas:	glasses
bordes:	edges
geológica:	geological
ponía:	put
aceptando:	accepting
telúrica:	telluric
arquitectura:	architecture
desconcertante:	disconcerting
destinados:	intended
hilos:	threads
rotas:	routes
barridos:	swept
campanarios:	bell towers
gótica:	gothic
catedral:	cathedral
extrañas:	strange
miraba:	looked
encontraba:	found
pintores:	painters
irse:	go
Tenía:	Had
podían:	they could
detuve:	I stopped
miré:	Look
salí:	I went out
dormido:	asleep
Nuestras:	Our
semilla:	seed
maceración:	maceration
pesca:	fishing
flechas:	arrows
moriche:	in chili
cintura:	waist
guayuco:	hang on co
remedio.:	remedy.
—del:	-of the
tragar:	swallow
hallaba:	found
despierto:	awake
viendo:	seeing
dejarlo:	leave it
seguida:	followed
júbilo:	jubilation
cantan:	they sing
rodado:	wheeled
cerrando:	closing
trajo:	brought
embate:	clash
impedir:	prevent
peligroso:	dangerous
dientes:	teeth
relámpagos:	lightning
dibujadas:	drawn
barbas:	barbs
colmo:	full
espuma:	foam
rodeados:	surrounded
rápido:	fast
agarrar:	grab
vertiginoso:	vertiginous
saltando:	jumping
peñas:	rocks
raudal:	torrent
palmo:	palm
escapar:	escape
metiendo:	putting
curiara:	court
yacer:	lie
abrazó:	hug
caiga:	fall
peligros.:	dangers.
furia:	rage
islas:	islands
garfios:	hooks
termina:	ends
estalla:	explodes
olas:	eggs
trabado:	stuck
hayamos:	let's have
parte.:	part.
caídas:	falls
vertiente:	slope
desciende:	descends
paisajes:	landscapes
anunciadores:	announcers
riberas:	banks
estrecha:	narrow
vemos:	we see
laja:	intervene
bestia:	beast
hagiografía:	hagiography
interrumpe:	interrupts
oculta:	hidden
percata:	notice
sucedido:	happened
terribles:	terrible
comienza:	starts
mercaderes:	merchants
decires:	you say
grato:	grateful
queriendo:	wanting
«La:	"The
oficiante:	officiant
humildad:	modesty
exige:	demands
demostrarme:	show me
socarronamente:	slyly
hallazgo:	find
fiebre:	fever
fangoso.:	muddy.
cauce:	channel
reconocer:	recognize
remeros:	rowers
hubiésemos:	we would have
girar:	spin
ánfora:	amphora
inmóviles:	motionless
alturas:	heights
tremendas:	tremendous
dibujaban:	they drew
rectas:	straight
mármol:	marble
capítulos:	chapters
selvas:	jungles
propias:	own
eterno:	eternal
encarnado:	red
gorro:	cap
espanto:	astonishment
garzas:	herons
mentían:	they lied
necesita:	needs
marca:	mark
explica:	explains
diciembre):	December)
Cabellera:	Hair
griegos:	greeks
andando:	going
descansar:	rest
destinadas:	intended
busco:	I'm looking for
avellanado:	countersunk
Alzo:	I get up
bóvedas:	vaults
lentamente:	slowly
colectivo:	collective
alivio:	relief
debilidad:	weakness
aspecto:	aspect
autor:	author
viaje.:	journey.
periodista:	journalist
Parece:	It seems
conyugal:	conjugal
rostros:	faces
abraza:	hug
perdón:	sorry
Tengo:	Have
mentiras:	lies
suma:	addition
conversación:	conversation
velado:	veiled
ignoran:	they ignore
hallarse:	be
iniciar:	start
vitrinas:	showcases
volando:	flying
dejé:	I left
llamáis:	you call
acuesto:	I lie down
estrépito:	crash
cierra:	close
capaz:	able
divorcio.:	divorce.
esfuerzo:	effort
destino.:	destination.
vocación:	vocation
tinta.:	ink.
admito:	I admit
Hago:	Do
vuelven:	they come back
beber:	to drink
acá:	here
minutos:	minutes
cuarto:	room
rumbos:	directions
partida:	match
novela:	novel
decirme:	tell me
semana:	week
cerrada:	closed
esto.:	this.
señaló:	pointed out
rebozo:	shawl
diálogo:	dialogue
salidos:	exited
fría:	cold
admitir:	admit
rodillas:	knees
alfombra:	rug
encontró:	found
pintado:	painted
nociones:	notions
oigo:	I hear
lápiz:	pencil
lugares:	places
evasión:	evasion
vanidad:	vanity
situación:	situation
firme:	firm
verla:	see it
gravidez:	pregnancy
importancia:	importance
pasaron:	bird
libertad:	freedom
abierta:	open
ridículo:	ridiculous
edificante:	edifying
pueden:	they can
vivía:	lived
empiezan:	they start
esperaba:	I expected
da:	and
papeles:	papers
venidos:	come
Todas:	All
fui:	I went
casos:	cases
dolor.:	pain.
inacabable:	unending
respiración:	breathing
prisa:	hurry
asegurar:	ensure
puntos:	points
tumba:	grave
llenado:	fill
cuentas:	accounts
episodio:	episode
pasajes:	tickets
Vuelvo:	I'm back
propiciatorio.:	propitiatory.
hablaba:	spoke
verdadero:	TRUE
peor:	worse
estilo:	style
Brabante:	Brabant
aullan:	howl
vida.:	life.
pedirle:	ask
añadiendo:	adding
ancianos:	seniors
Aún:	Still
invención:	invention
melismático:	melismatic
pureza:	Preza
dibujo:	drawing
Aquello:	That
nube:	cloud
vocablos:	words
corifeo:	coryphean
posibilidades:	possibilities
Treno.:	Train.
esbozos:	sketches
oscuridad:	darkness
consistencia:	consistency
fórmulas:	formulas
curiosidad:	curiosity
partitura:	score
lógica:	logic
haberle:	have him
tratando:	treating
efectos:	effects
inútil:	useless
hermoso:	beautiful
armado:	armed
siente:	feel
piel:	fur
grasas:	fats
afirma:	states
marcha:	march
cerebro:	brain
sabores:	flavors
pereza:	laziness
Mesetas:	Plateaus
aquellos:	those
voz.:	voice.
buscador:	seeker
tenga:	have
—si:	-and
sabido:	known
terciopelo:	velvet
llevo:	he took
indios.:	Indians.
—una:	-a
fija:	fixed
levantar:	lift
señalado:	indicated
trabajo:	job
época:	era
queda:	is left over
comunidad:	community
acuerdos:	agreements
Indios:	Indians
Capitán:	Captain
orejas:	ears
señala:	points out
estupor:	stupor
redondez:	roundness
dejaron:	they left
regresado:	returned
sordo:	deaf
llegó:	arrive
primitivos:	primitives
oídos:	ears
demiurgo:	demiurge
amenaza:	threat
llamado:	called
dificultad:	difficulty
fácil:	easy
dios:	God
puso:	heart
desorden:	disorder
inquieto:	restless
conduce:	lead
descender:	descend
solución:	solution
hamaca:	hammock
cabecera:	head
hallé:	I found
esteras:	mats
confesar:	confess
quebrado:	broken
acabando:	running out
ellas:	they
saben:	per
recoger:	collect
treno:	train
afán:	eagerness
mágico:	magical
prácticas:	practices
Veo:	I see
reflejo:	reflection
abrir:	open
amarla:	love her
renuncia:	resignation
quiera:	want
medido:	measured
edificación:	building
decisión:	decision
abiertas:	open
manantiales:	springs
cubre:	covers
entra:	enter
raíces:	roots
bulle:	bulls
atando:	tying
fuese:	was
olvidado:	forgotten
olivo:	olive tree
Noé:	Noah
Diluvio:	Flood
inesperada:	unexpected
figuraciones:	figurations
altura:	height
trazados:	traces
pienso:	I think
debió:	should have
simples:	simple
usando:	using
vasta:	only
indudable:	doubtless
fieras:	beasts
insectos:	insects
enfermedades:	diseases
Terrenal:	Earthly
Paraíso:	Paradise
interesa:	interest
abandonado:	abandoned
futuro:	future
patas:	paws
Sólo:	Only
Nunca:	Never
aparecen:	appear
percutiente:	striking
revelar:	reveal
frascos:	jars
encierran:	enclose
descansan:	they rest
hallaron:	they found
misiones:	missions
cercano:	nearby
duermen:	they sleep
nadie:	nobody
ofrecido:	offered
halló:	found
Tierras:	Land
tinta:	ink
título:	title
llamo:	called
arrojando:	throwing
hogar:	home
peligros:	dangers
dicen:	they say
tremendo:	tremendous
oportunidad:	chance
advierte:	warns
recibir:	receive
acuden:	they come
orgullo:	pride
También:	Also
almacén:	store
pequeñas:	small
viviendas:	housing
pequeños:	small
curso:	course
continente:	continent
cuento:	tale
Henoch:	Enoch
llevando:	carrying
traerá:	will bring
creyendo:	believing
puesta:	putting
haberse:	have
abrazamos:	we hug
tinieblas:	darkness
tristeza:	sadness
noche.:	evening.
agujas:	needles
cimas:	tops
últimas:	latest
sucesión:	succession
ecos:	echoes
amarillas:	yellow
cipos:	cipes
presenta:	presents
palmos:	spans
corteza:	crust
geometría:	geometry
milenios:	millennia
—pues:	-well
guardar:	keep
rodeado:	surrounded
lenguaje:	language
hervor:	out
subterráneo:	underground
confusa:	confused
palabra.:	word.
espantos:	frights
Hechicero:	Sorcerer
horas.:	hours.
hábito:	habit
Dioses:	Gods
presión:	pressure
cubiertos:	covered
bocas:	mouths
horribles:	horrible
inutilidad:	futility
anteriores:	previous
Sus:	Their
hormigas:	ants
andan:	from the moment
Adán:	Adam
Génesis.:	Genesis.
estamos:	we are
disposición:	provision
resulta:	result
ocurrido:	occurred
recuerdan:	remember
«el:	"he
recompensa:	reward
salud:	health
comarcas:	regions
Antes:	Before
viajes:	trips
creen:	believe
Adelantado.:	Advanced.
siglos:	ages
desaforada:	unbridled
viajar:	travel
Que:	What
posible.:	possible.
pareja:	couple
hiciera:	did
prestos:	ready
clavos:	nails
poca:	little
Conquista:	Conquest
Libros:	Books
contemplando:	contemplating
nuestro:	our
cabezas:	heads
tus:	the
día.:	day.
naves:	ships
Hubo:	Was
dudas:	doubts
«Hijo:	"Son
actitud:	attitude
jefe:	boss
distinta:	different
luminarias:	luminaries
ornamentos:	ornaments
cuero:	leather
seguido:	followed
contento:	happy
mío.:	mine.
instinto:	instinct
sonido:	sound
juegos:	games
sonajeras:	rattles
veinte:	twenty
Pensando:	Thinking
años.:	years.
llevaba:	wore
perfiles:	profiles
vientres:	bellies
común:	common
relatos:	reports
sometida:	subdued
concierto:	concert
apacible:	gentle
propios:	own
Comprendí:	I understood
hueso:	bone
rodeada:	surrounded
madres:	mothers
colgados:	hung
grandeza:	greatness
cascadas:	waterfalls
familia:	family
interpretación:	interpretation
órgano:	organ
nieblas:	fogs
prohibido:	forbidden
suelo.:	floor.
embriaguez:	drunkenness
caza:	hunting
desnudo:	naked
Detrás:	Behind
llaman:	they call
aldea:	village
Dios:	God
duermo:	I sleep
Océano:	Ocean
acorde:	chord
tormenta:	storm
Comprendo:	Understand
angustia:	distress
puedan:	can
nacido:	born
vamos:	let's go
dejo:	let
cuelga:	hanging
amante:	lover
incapaz:	unable
golpea:	hits
pluralidad:	plurality
silueta:	silhouette
claridad:	clarity
rayo:	ray
pinta:	surface
muertas:	dead
viento:	wind
peso:	weight
acrece:	increases
empuje:	push
torrentes:	torrents
costado:	side
amarillo:	yellow
arroja:	throws
excluye:	excludes
cumple:	meets
derecho:	right
tuviera:	had
hubiese:	would have
carga:	load
traspasado:	transferred
malos:	bad
ejemplos:	examples
Creación:	Creation
acabará:	will end
atribuye:	attributes
vueltas:	turns
respuesta:	answer
torrente:	torrent
lecho:	litter
descanso:	rest
detenido:	arrested
separación:	separation
hechas:	made
Tampoco:	Neither
prodigiosa:	prodigious
pequeño:	little
grito:	shout
cuello:	neck
cubierta:	deck
habitación:	room
único:	single
noticias:	news
mirando:	looking
licor:	liqueur
llega:	arrives
prensa:	press
dicho:	saying
ciento:	hundred
fusil:	gun
crece:	grows
cuerdas:	ropes
atrás.:	back.
compañero:	buddy
Curador.:	Curator.
hombros:	shoulders
además:	besides
apuntes:	notes
impaciencia:	impatience
aturdimiento:	daze
tanta:	so much
hará:	will do
escribir.:	write.
verdadera:	true
escrito:	written
componer:	compose
adolescencia:	adolescence
escena:	scene
alcanzar:	reach
empezó:	started
bastante:	quite
terreno:	land
estuviera:	was
distancias:	distances
público:	public
personaje:	character
acentos:	accents
melodía:	melody
composición:	composition
quise:	I wanted
claro:	Of course
elementos:	elements
torna:	returns
propio:	own
pensar.:	think.
impaciente:	impatient
acercarse:	approach
entero:	whole
Perteneciente:	Belonging
de...:	of...
encontrado:	found
arrojado:	thrown
pregunto:	asked
quedado:	left
interés:	interest
Gavilán:	Hawk
Cuaderno:	Notebook
suprema:	supreme
mazorcas:	cobs
marcado:	marked
proceso:	process
vasto:	vast
hondamente:	deeply
eso:	that
ayuda:	aid
capítulo:	chapter
rodar:	rotate
estudio:	study
preciso:	necessary
lejanías:	distances
empeñado:	pawned
verme:	don't give
cantar:	sing
tema:	him
podía:	could
conocer:	know
maravilloso:	marvelous
recordar:	remember
espesa:	thick
querido:	darling
pudo:	could
ausencia:	absence
paredón:	wall
muestra:	sample
siguen:	they continue
viven:	they live
haga:	do
contorno:	contour
esperar:	wait
tuve:	I had
ofrece:	offers
joven:	young
música.:	music.
trata:	treats
alegría:	happiness
acepta:	accept
nuevas:	new
ésta:	this
hijas:	daughters
Gobierno:	Government
añade:	duck
detengo:	I stop
plagas:	pests
plantas:	plants
imaginación:	imagination
hombro:	shoulder
alcance:	range
amanecer:	sunrise
montaña:	mountain
poner:	put
labios:	lips
crear:	create
posee:	owns
conoce:	know
cazador:	hunter
enunciado:	statement
tratar:	treat
figura:	figure
situado:	situated
dedo:	finger
planchas:	irons
venas:	is coming
huesos:	bones
siquiera:	even
recursos:	resources
conocen:	they know
Apenas:	Just
larvas:	larvae
gestos:	gestures
senos:	old
cultura:	culture
izquierda:	left
crepúsculo:	dusk
jornadas:	days
Este:	It is
más.:	further.
entrañas:	bowels
constante:	constant
tercera:	third
oscuro:	dark
días.:	days.
arranca:	starts
seguro:	insurance
fuga:	leak
fechas:	dates
llevar:	carry
hicieron:	they did
funciones:	functions
modos:	modes
enseres:	equipment
empresa:	enterprise
Edad:	Age
asentado:	settled
Conquistadores:	Pathfinders
hacerlo:	do it
te:	the
quisiera:	I'd like
vuelo:	flight
distintos:	distinct
abre:	open
pensaba:	thought
destino:	destination
deber:	duty
libro:	book
extraños:	strangers
Allí:	Over there
Cada:	Each
desarrollo:	development
tenían:	they had
arrugado:	wrinkled
Bajo:	Low
concepto:	concept
ajeno:	unaffiliated
ritmos:	rhythms
fueran:	were
bajar:	lower
valores:	values
imposible:	impossible
belleza:	beauty
buscaba:	I was looking for
espesas:	thick
hombre.:	man.
metidos:	stuck up
memoria:	memory
monumentos:	monuments
habíamos:	we had
peces:	pieces
Frente:	Forehead
espejo:	mirror
arcos:	bows
fuerte:	strong
humo:	in it
sueño:	dream
tensión:	strain
trueno:	thunder
sinfonía:	symphony
agarra:	grab
sorprendente:	surprising
proa:	bow
cabellera:	hair
frío:	cold
salido:	left
tremenda:	tremendous
raudales:	rapids
llamar:	call
misión:	mission
caras:	guys
visión:	vision
último:	last
riendo:	laughing
emprende:	undertake
misionero:	missionary
pregunta:	ask
yacimiento:	deposit
gritos:	shouting
misterio:	mystery
inmensas:	immense
distintas:	distinct
encima:	on
niños:	children
repente:	suddenly
plumas:	feathers
botella:	bottle
divorcio:	divorce
olor:	smell
cincuenta:	fifty
todo.:	all.
partir:	leave
dijo:	said
tratado:	treated
escribir:	write
pasos:	steps
elemento:	element
segunda:	second
atención:	attention
dolor:	pain
significado:	meaning
acaba:	ends
luces:	lights
extraviado:	lost
perro:	dog
morir:	to die
prosa:	prose
aparición:	appearance
intento:	tried
empezar:	begin
confusión:	confusion
alguien:	someone
Así:	So
habré:	there will be
golpe:	blow
tipo:	type
destinado:	intended
Pienso:	I think
hallada:	found
creo:	believe
propósito:	purpose
partes:	parts
pudiera:	could
preguntándome:	wondering
mazorca:	cob
serpientes:	snakes
allá.:	there.
pesar:	weigh
juego:	game
sabe:	he knows
probablemente:	probably
perdido:	lost
sonoridad:	sonority
nombres:	names
última:	last
lunes:	Monday
tierras:	land
mozo:	guy
mineros:	miners
extremo:	extreme
mesetas:	plateaus
fundado:	founded
aleja:	move away
—la:	-the
habrán:	there will be
naturales:	natural
vacío:	empty
siete:	seven
tragedia:	tragedy
cadáver:	corpse
notas:	notes
garganta:	throat
dibujado:	drawn
abiertos:	open
única:	unique
cautivos:	captives
vuelvo:	I'm back
mirada:	look
figuras:	figures
blancas:	white
hayan:	have
rumbo:	course
generación:	generation
gentes:	people
cuales:	which
comprender:	grasp
sé:	see
varón:	male
naturaleza:	nature
matriz:	headquarters
medida:	measure
dejar:	leave
existe:	exists
alguno:	some
voluntad:	willpower
buen:	good
danzas:	dances
siglo:	century
transcurre:	passes
—el:	-he
signos:	signs
orillas:	shores
Esta:	This
revelación:	revelation
columnas:	columns
hallando:	finding
tempestad:	storm
espíritu:	spirit
daba:	after
instrumento:	instrument
ello:	it
posesión:	possession
bastón:	cane
envuelto:	wrapped
dedos:	fingers
función:	function
Nada:	Nothing
ámbito:	scope
existencia:	existence
mío:	mine
orilla:	bank
ropas:	clothes
árbol:	tree
algunas:	some
negras:	black
cien:	hundred
otras:	others
planos:	plans
templo:	temple
menor:	smaller
Formas:	Shapes
cuestión:	question
Allá:	There
hacerme:	make me
Había:	There was
junio):	June)
pecho:	chest
peligro:	danger
capuchino:	cappuccino
razón:	reason
adelante:	forward
atrás:	back
levanta:	get up
caño:	spout
demora:	delay
causa:	cause
paisaje:	landscape
evidente:	obvious
pide:	ask
espera:	wait
voces:	you
enana:	dwarf
hallado:	found
piloto:	pilot
semanas:	weeks
Desde:	From
mía:	tight
abierto:	open
estado:	state
dando:	giving
poema:	poem
quería:	wanted to
signo:	sign
ruinas:	ruins
vuelto:	turned
Curador:	Curator
olvidar:	forget
tronco:	stem
libros:	books
larga:	long
montañas:	mountains
encuentra:	finds
remedios:	remedies
cuenta:	account
maíz:	corn
habían:	had
Aquí:	Here
animales:	animals
acaso:	chance
país:	country
hecha:	made
cascada:	waterfall
noches:	nights
celo:	even
especie:	species
brazo:	arm
pensado:	thought
brazos:	arms
caído:	fallen
vivir:	live
conmigo:	with me
centro:	center
encontrar:	find
antiguos:	ancient
posibilidad:	possibility
muerto:	dead
dinero:	money
conocido:	acquaintance
Estamos:	We are
tiempo.:	time.
escritura:	writing
yerbas:	herbs
estampa:	print
perfil:	profile
asombro:	astonishment
recién:	newly
hizo:	those
acento:	accent
Si:	And
debía:	should
acción:	action
Como:	As
parecía:	it seemed
sorpresa:	surprise
veía:	saw
rescate:	rescue
jarra:	jug
venado:	deer
emoción:	emotion
comienzo:	beginning
musicales:	musicals
cuerpos:	bodies
demás:	others
remoto:	remote
manera:	manner
dioses:	gods
enormes:	huge
hamacas:	hammocks
aguardiente:	schnapps
nivel:	level
lleva:	carry
seguir:	follow
nuestros:	our
ocurre:	occurs
rostro:	face
lados:	sides
comprendo:	understand
navegación:	navigation
tono:	application
nuevos:	new
pensando:	thinking
enojo:	anger
ánimo:	cheer up
dar:	but
primeras:	first
formas:	shapes
orquesta:	orchestra
ruido:	noise
debajo:	below
orden:	order
tomar:	take
mejor:	better
prueba:	proof
falta:	lack
mirar:	look
tenido:	had
sentir:	to feel
noticia:	news
mente:	mind
pasa:	happens
volver:	return
así:	So
Odisea:	Odyssey
obras:	works
caer:	fall
Algo:	Something
Estoy:	I'm
perros:	dogs
meses:	months
pueda:	can
quiere:	wants
acabo:	just
pocas:	few
deben:	they must
hemos:	we have
ambos:	both
cuatro:	four
estos:	these
objetos:	objects
cierta:	true
existencia.:	existence.
oficios:	crafts
iba:	others
absurdo:	absurd
seres:	beings
Su:	They are
Más:	Further
sexo:	sex
sensación:	sensation
mí.:	my.
techo:	ceiling
quedaba:	remained
sigue:	go on
difícil:	difficult
posible:	possible
Todo:	All
borde:	should
Mesetas.:	Plateaus.
Grandes:	Big
acto:	act
buscando:	searching
grita:	scream
tras:	after
poder:	can
cuarenta:	forty
mediodía:	average
semejantes:	similar
espacio:	space
humedad:	humidity
periódico:	newspaper
sabiendo:	knowing
necesario:	necessary
troncos:	trunks
podría:	could
semblante:	countenance
expresión:	expression
medios:	media
siento:	I feel
muchos:	many
cambio:	change
trabajar:	work
hora:	time
pasar:	market
parecen:	they seem
uso:	use
ellos:	they
espaldas:	backs
Además:	Besides
leyes:	laws
haciendo:	doing
tantas:	so many
salen:	the hall
Porque:	Why
nombre:	name
uno:	a
busca:	search
salir:	go out
silencio:	silence
tarea:	task
aquello:	that
andar:	to walk
dado:	given
aquella:	that
ahí:	there
Esto:	This
ramas:	remaining
hechos:	facts
varias:	several
vuelve:	comes back
hijo:	son
cabeza:	head
canoa:	canoe
calor:	heat
lluvias:	rains
habrá:	there will be
corriente:	current
griego:	Greek
creciente:	growing
nuestras:	our
piernas:	legs
mismas:	themselves
empieza:	begin
cosa:	What
quiero:	wanna
Ya:	Of
recuerdo:	memory
cualquier:	any
arte:	until
fuerza:	force
será:	it will be
segundo:	second
regreso:	return
correr:	run
aunque:	although
sombras:	shadows
puedo:	I can
tengo:	I have
arriba:	above
digo:	I say
ríos:	rivers
caminos:	roads
ciudades:	cities
movimiento:	motion
instante:	instant
propia:	own
punto:	point
semejante:	such
después:	after
muchas:	many
llena:	full
últimos:	last
oficio:	job
cierto:	TRUE
según:	according to
nosotros:	us
abajo:	below
conciencia:	awareness
deseo:	desire
señal:	sign
suena:	sounds
historia:	history
vientre:	belly
tener:	have
debo:	I must
caso:	case
demasiado:	too much
Para:	To
responde:	respond
dejado:	left
choza:	hut
teatro:	theater
llegado:	arrived
realidad:	reality
menos:	less
muerte:	death
Un:	And
unas:	nails
varios:	several
viene:	he comes
estaban:	were
grandes:	big
Simón:	Simon
avión:	plane
necesidad:	need
sería:	I would be
hacen:	do
Treno:	Train
hacía:	toward
texto:	text
nunca:	never
ciertas:	certain
secreto:	secret
año:	year
objeto:	object
tantos:	so many
través:	through
hubieran:	they would have
mujeres:	women
cerca:	fence
tenía:	had
entrada:	Prohibited
apenas:	just
gente:	people
decir:	say
forma:	shape
primeros:	first
esposa:	wife
habla:	speaks
puesto:	position
Venados:	Deer
allí:	over there
ciertos:	some
idioma:	language
algunos:	some
súbito:	sudden
jamás:	never
—como:	-as
fondo:	bottom
detrás:	behind
pasado:	past
fraile:	friar
llegar:	arrive
hablar:	talk
Luego:	Then
qué:	that
debe:	has to
tiempos:	time
bien:	GOOD
estoy:	I'm
pájaros:	birds
Le:	The
Anunciación:	Annunciation
frente:	forehead
sentido:	sense
mientras:	while
haya:	these
están:	are
cómo:	as
cual:	which
hojas:	leaves
él:	he
torno:	lathe
nubes:	clouds
casi:	almost
encuentro:	meeting
viaje:	journey
tarde:	afternoon
presente:	gift
visto:	view
lejos:	far
estar:	be
cuyos:	whose
nuestra:	our
nuevamente:	again
sí:	Yeah
Mouche:	Fly
obra:	work
parte:	part
fueron:	were
pensar:	think
acerca:	about
suelo:	floor
cuyas:	whose
porque:	why
hallar:	cases
hacer:	do
cuanto:	how much
puede:	can
tienen:	have
buscar:	look for
momento:	moment
verdad:	TRUE
lluvia:	rain
horas:	hours
todavía:	still
esas:	those
junto:	together
presencia:	presence
mañana:	tomorrow
les:	THE
también:	also
entonces:	so
gesto:	gesture
toda:	all
palabras:	words
Mónica:	Monica
quienes:	who
ritmo:	rhythm
instrumentos:	instruments
mano:	thousand
estas:	is
veces:	times
años:	years
aquel:	that
veo:	I see
primera:	first
Una:	A
Por:	By
regresar:	go back
mucho:	a lot
lado:	side
misma:	same
cuyo:	whose
palabra:	word
tanto:	both
eran:	were
unos:	some
esos:	those
cosas:	things
cuya:	whose
otros:	others
han:	he
parece:	it seems
dentro:	within
cuerpo:	body
miedo:	fear
Ahora:	Now
árboles:	trees
pues:	well
hubiera:	had
aún:	still
papel:	paper
sido:	been
otro:	other
medio:	half
algún:	some
sólo:	only
voz:	voice
hecho:	made
nada:	nothing
tres:	three
todas:	all
tal:	of
fuera:	out
siempre:	always
modo:	way
otra:	other
lugar:	place
Cuando:	When
suerte:	luck
vida:	life
De:	Of
esto:	this
mundo:	world
tiene:	has
fue:	was
antes:	before
alguna:	some
poco:	bit
música:	music
cada:	each
indios:	indians
hasta:	until
todos:	all
estaba:	was
ese:	that
día:	day
durante:	during
mismo:	same
esta:	this
este:	it is
desde:	from
ni:	in
allá:	there
noche:	evening
pero:	but
mujer:	women
ojos:	eyes
hombres:	men
está:	this
días:	days
luego:	then
hacia:	toward
tiempo:	time
hombre:	man
bajo:	low
quien:	who
muy:	very
Adelantado:	Advanced
En:	In
hace:	does
dos:	of the
algo:	something
La:	The
entre:	between
mí:	my
ser:	to be
le:	the
ya:	of
si:	and
aquí:	here
El:	He
ahora:	now
donde:	where
todo:	all
había:	there was
vez:	time
Pero:	But
cuando:	when
sobre:	on
sus:	their
más:	further
como:	as
para:	to
su:	are
por:	by
se:	with
una:	a
un:	and
del:	of the
el:	he
en:	in
la:	the
que:	what
de:	of
