151
:	151
Jenofonte.:	Xenophon.
Anábasis:	Anabasis
admiraba:	admired
solamente:	only
apuntar:	aim
faltó:	short
siquiera.:	even.
modificado:	modified
viajaba:	was traveling
minero:	miner
preciosas.:	precious.
yacimientos:	deposits
alientan:	encourage
Responden:	Respondent
viajero:	traveler
personajes:	characters
Hechicero.:	Sorcerer.
venezolano—:	Venezuelan-
archivos:	files
fonográficamente:	phonographically
grabó:	recorded
shirishanas:	srishanas
descritos:	described
Autana.:	Autoana.
piaroa:	pair
fisonomía:	physiognomy
descubrieron:	discovered
franceses:	French
famosos:	famous
regiones:	regions
distintas:	distinct
geográfica—:	geographic—
ubicación:	location
—aún:	-still
poblaciones:	populations
nacido:	born
tumultuoso:	tumultuous
Brasil:	Brazil
viniéndose:	coming
ascensión:	rise
incipiente:	incipient
acceder:	access
Uarirén:	The Uariren
Capítulos:	Chapters
distintos:	distinct
ofrece:	offers
visión:	vision
Sabana:	Sheet
trocado:	exchanged
gótica.:	gothic.
catedral:	cathedral
Formas:	Shapes
Muerto.:	Dead.
Raudal:	Torrent
paraje:	place
acontece:	it happens
tormenta:	storm
oculta.:	hidden
atracadero:	dock
vegetación:	vegetation
Caño:	Spout
confluencia:	confluence
situarse:	situate oneself
curso:	course
exactamente:	exactly
América:	America
descrito:	described
vez.:	time.
fotografiados:	photographed
conocidos:	acquaintances
precisas:	accurate
visiones:	visions
ciñe:	cinema
legítima:	legitimate
aclarar:	clarify
países:	countries
comunes:	common
integran:	integrate
prototipos:	prototypes
aparecen:	appear
provincianas;:	provincial;
latinoamericana:	latin american
ubicación::	location:
capítulos:	chapters
acción:	action
NOTA:	USE
150
:	150
enero:	January
palmos:	spans
cuchillo:	knife
Corteza:	Crust
aclara:	clarify
manchado:	stained
ocre:	ocher
escamado:	flaky
próximas:	nearby
orillas:	shores
mueren:	they die
dulces:	sweets
algas:	started
rocosos:	rocky
espolones:	dewclaws
erizan:	bristle
sumergidas:	submerged
lajas:	slabs
Reaparecen:	They reappear
notablemente:	notably
descendido:	descended
Sísifo.:	Sisyphus.
vacaciones:	vacation
aguarda.:	wait.
Cómitre:	Committee
martillazos:	hammer blows
privado:	private
ensordecido:	deafened
seré:	I will be
Falta:	Lack
—oficio:	-job
componer:	compose
sitúa:	situates
historia.:	history.
tangibles:	tangible
testimonios:	testimonials
representado:	represented
inmediato:	immediate
adelantarse:	get ahead
desligarse:	disengage
impedida:	prevented
difíciles.:	difficult.
amores:	loves
Romanticismo:	Romance
umbrosas:	shady
mansiones:	mansions
abiertas:	open
transcurre.:	passes.
ofrecen:	offer
época.:	era.
escapar:	escape
mienten:	they lie
ignorarse:	ignore
Aquí:	Here
rodean.:	surround.
tenga:	have
cumplido:	compliment
ardidos:	burning
Navegaré:	I will sail
Manatí.:	Manatee.
embarcar:	embark
pasaje:	passage
tiende:	tends
fui.:	I went.
cenizas:	ashes
lleno:	full
devolvió:	returned
trunco—:	trunk
—ahora:	-now
torcido:	crooked
destino:	destination
enderezar:	straighten
neumas.:	I don't know.
ordenación:	ordering
descanso:	rest
aprovechar:	leverage
lista:	list
contrapuntista:	contrapuntist
exigua:	little
realidades:	realities
Oficios:	Offices
Inventores:	Inventors
portento:	portent
convivencia:	coexistence
recóndita:	hidden
pasé:	happens
edades;:	ages;
viajado:	traveled
actuando:	acting
potencias:	powers
trabada:	stuck
légamo:	let's go
destinos:	destinations
forjan:	forge
costumbres:	traditions
abrazar:	embrace
renuncia:	resignation
abrigar:	shelter
conversión:	conversion
zozobras:	anxiety
esfuerza:	strive
Apocalipsis.:	Apocalypse.
hacedores:	doers
Prefieren:	They prefer
otra.:	other.
llevadera:	bearable
simplemente:	simply
creen:	believe
intelectual;:	intellectual;
convicción:	conviction
viven:	they live
Quienes:	Who
explicados.:	explained.
vividos:	lived
mundos:	worlds
alguna.:	some.
respondía:	responded
febrilmente:	feverishly
dirigía:	directed
Recuerdo:	Memory
Detenido.:	Arrested.
Tiempo:	Time
Visitador:	Visitor
prestado.:	provided.
Fui:	I went
creído:	believed
ahora—:	now-
agobiadora:	overwhelming
varón...»:	male..."
Naturaleza:	Nature
149
:	149
marido.:	husband.
Mujer:	Women
compasión::	compassion:
consumado:	consummated
lograr:	achieve
retroceder:	back
pretende:	intend
implorante:	imploring
Sacado:	Taken
destruirlo.:	destroy it.
compareciendo:	appearing
estuviese:	was
apelación:	appeal
justificarse:	justify
externas:	external
razones:	reasons
debió:	should have
adquiridos:	acquired
derechos:	rights
sé:	see
balbuciente.:	stammering
protesta:	protest
intenta:	try
gaznate:	fizzy
lacerado:	lacerated
gime:	moans
ordenara.:	would order.
echaría:	would throw
movería:	would move
sentado:	sitting
horruras:	horrors
ennegrecido:	blackened
aliento:	breath
recupero:	recovery
desgarradas.:	torn.
toses:	you cough
rompe:	breaks
tragar:	swallow
derramo:	i spill
Lleno:	Full
quemadura.:	burn.
dentro.:	within.
alfileres:	pins
eriza:	hedgehog
ensordecido.:	deafened
Quedo:	I stay
recién...»:	newly..."
griego—.:	Greek-.
«Mujer:	"Women
hace.:	does.
salud:	health
diga:	say
hable:	speak
grito:	shout
Agarro:	Grab
fusil.»:	gun."
matarme:	kill me
dijeron:	they said
trabajar::	work:
quise:	I wanted
sacan;:	they take out;
estúpida;:	stupid;
Gente:	People
idiota:	idiot
«Gente:	"People
desconocida:	unknown
viniendo:	coming
sospechado::	suspected:
anunciadores:	announcers
recogió:	picked up
confidencias:	confidences
finge:	pretends
hallazgo:	find
interesarme:	be interested
Adelantado;:	Advanced;
conocí:	I met
hermano:	brother
llamándome:	calling me
aparatosamente:	spectacularly
explotación.:	exploitation.
ofrezco:	I offer
buscarme:	look for me
dejará:	will leave
codicia—.:	greed-.
apremio:	pressure
—cosa:	-What
regrese:	come back
aguardaré:	wait
dilación::	delay:
resigno:	I resign
Despechado:	Dismissed
escuchen.:	listen.
temiendo:	fearing
piensa:	think
dialogar:	dialogue
mediodía.:	average.
zarpar:	set sail
Manatí:	Manatee
avisa:	newspaper
salgamos:	let's go out
difiera:	differ
suplico:	I beg
responde—.:	responds.
«Sí:	"Yeah
preocupa.:	worries.
imponerle:	impose
interesa.:	interest
mapa.:	map.
prodigiosa:	prodigious
encontrado.:	found.
tropiece:	tropie
obsesionante:	haunting
denuncio:	complaint
descubrimiento;:	discovery;
desasosegado:	uneasy
Utre.:	Tomorrow
alucinado:	hallucinated
buscados:	wanted
tesoros:	treasures
renuncian:	resign
sesos:	brains
trastornado:	deranged
kilates:	cheilitis
gema:	echo
sueña:	sounds
grandes.»:	big.”
ahogada—.:	drowned.
confía:	trust
catorce:	fourteen
«Diamantes:	«Diamonds
portentoso.:	portentous.
hundió:	sank
busca.:	search.
centinelas:	sentinels
ahumado.:	smoked.
148
:	148
vidrio:	glass
cristalitos:	crystallites
comprimidos:	pills
tubo:	profit
lámpara:	lamp
muestra:	sample
ventanas:	windows
asegura:	assures
llave:	key
Allí:	Over there
habitación.:	room.
lleve:	carry
ruega:	beg
conspirador:	conspirator
hacía.:	toward.
detenerse:	stop
vacila:	hesitate
atropella:	runs over
hilvanada.:	in the hilvana.
nervioso:	highly strung
nada.:	nothing.
acabando:	running out
desconfiados:	suspicious
inquietos:	restless
penetrante:	penetrating
griego::	Greek:
rasgos:	traits
cambiado:	changed
semanas.:	weeks.
También:	Also
incisión.:	incision.
larga:	long
él;:	he;
penetramos:	we penetrate
anegado;:	waterlogged;
seguramente:	surely
conoce:	know
interesa::	interest:
afectuosa:	affectionate
tónica:	tonic
andanzas:	wanderings
halagador:	flattering
avellanado.:	countersunk.
escapara:	will escape
temiera:	feared
agarro:	grab
camisa.:	shirt.
sudor:	sweat
envolviéndome:	involving me
alegría.:	happiness.
conozco:	know
estalla:	explodes
pegar.:	to take.
zafarme:	get away
retuerzo:	twist
broma:	joke
necia:	foolish
exclamación:	exclamation
prorrumpo:	I burst out
brutalidad:	brutality
doblándome:	bending
espinazo:	spine
afinca:	affina
rodilla:	knee
vigorosas:	vigorous
calleja:	quiet
llego:	arrive
Pensando:	Thinking
reproducción.:	reproduction.
ritos:	rites
Alianza:	Alliance
resignadamente:	resignedly
paroxísticos:	paroxysmal
llegan:	they arrive
importunar:	pester
escudillas:	bowls
lamen:	hand
escuchan:	they listen
taburetes:	stools
acuestan:	they lie down
inconfundible.:	unmistakable.
determinada:	determined
idéntico:	identical
Hace:	Does
Sur.:	On.
sobrecogiera:	would overwhelm
hechicero:	sorcerer
cercano:	nearby
oscuro:	dark
podrían:	could
gritos:	shouting
sistemáticas:	systematic
grabaciones:	recordings
Descubiertas:	Discovered
jaurías.:	packs
perro-chamán:	shaman-dog
misterioso:	mysterious
más—:	further-
—nunca:	-never
ladridos:	barking
invariablemente:	invariably
termina:	ends
duración:	duration
observado:	observed
rocas:	rocks
esucho:	Written by S.
aullidos:	howls
cántico:	chant
entonan:	they intone
vecindario:	neighborhood
picado:	chopped
agudo:	sharp
diapasón:	diapason
ladra:	thief
mandato:	mandate
apaga:	turn off
invertido:	invested
ruidos:	noises
relevo:	relief
espesuras:	thickets
posaran.:	they will put
manzana:	apple
acariciable:	caressable
vertiginosa:	vertiginous
mutación:	mutation
transforma:	transform
consistencia:	consistency
volumen:	volume
intermitencias:	intermittencies
adelgaza:	lose weight
hincha:	fan
—forma:	—shape
conservando:	preserving
espuma:	foam
esculturas:	sculptures
aislado:	isolated
fragor:	roar
irritación:	irritation
socavones:	sinkholes
tragantes:	swallowers
metida:	stuck up
hervor:	out
estremecidas:	trembling
viaje—.:	journey-.
proseguir:	pursue
afán:	eagerness
—preocupado:	—concerned
memoria:	memory
esfuerzos:	efforts
aguzado:	sharpened
crítico:	critical
147
:	147
espontaneidad:	spontaneity
Podría:	Could
tediosa.:	tedious
resulta:	result
seria:	he would be
fijar:	set
haría:	would
lentitud:	slowness
transcurren:	pass
Simón.:	Simon.
caños:	pipes
invitaciones:	invitations
tentadoras:	tempting
desoyendo:	ignoring
permanezco:	I remain
aparición:	appearance
haga:	do
simientes:	seeds
urgido:	urged
abrigo:	shelter
«También:	"Also
guía.:	guide.
posible:	possible
regresará»:	will return"
regresará...:	will return...
«Ya:	«Yes
promueve:	promotes
dueños:	owners
ponerme:	put on
útiles:	useful
conocedor:	connoisseur
Dicen:	They say
Anunciación.:	Annunciation.
inmovilizado:	immobilized
ratos:	rats
sacándome:	taking me out
burlar:	cheat
Titán:	Titan
irregulares—:	irregular—
estrofas:	stanzas
algunas:	some
—que:	-what
Voces:	You
encuadrar:	frame
ocupo:	I occupy
poema:	poem
inicia:	starts
magníficamente:	magnificently
Prometeo:	Prometheus
lamento:	I regret
quitado:	taken
carácter:	character
darle:	give
arrumbado:	tidy
árboles.:	trees.
zumbantes:	buzzing
espesan:	thicken
plagas:	pests
llenando:	filling
angustia.:	distress.
semblante...:	countenance...
mudado:	changed
informadores:	informants
barridos:	swept
referencia:	reference
puntos:	points
trastocados:	upset
paisajes:	landscapes
serlo:	be
excepcional:	exceptional
andado:	walked
desandar:	unravel
comete:	commit
demás—.:	others.
negado:	denied
—dueño:	-owner
proponga:	propose
hazaña:	feat
repetir:	repeat
descubierto:	uncovered
privilegios:	privileges
envanecido:	conceited
repartido:	distributed
trillado:	trite
vivirlo::	live it:
inconscientemente:	unconsciously
excepcionales:	exceptional
marcha:	march
entender:	to understand
resquemante:	resequent
Buscando:	Searching
aleja.:	move away
adormecida.:	asleep.
queda:	is left over
oportunidad:	chance
darían:	would give
advertida:	warned
misteriosamente:	mysteriously
secuestrado:	kidnapped
sospechar:	suspect
Neolítico:	Neolithic
ascendido:	promoted
vuelo.:	flight.
expresarme:	express myself
faltaban:	were missing
cuello:	neck
colgados:	hung
audífonos:	earphones
146
:	146
Mandatarios:	Representatives
despachado:	dispatched
regresar.:	go back.
tentación:	temptation
decisiva::	decisive:
sometido:	lost
nocturnos:	nocturnal
terrores:	terrors
vencedor:	winner
estrecha:	narrow
estará:	will be
apelación.:	appeal.
poniéndome:	putting me
«Hasta:	"Until
podamos:	we can
demorando:	delaying
respuesta:	answer
creciente.:	growing.
respeto»:	I respect"
«por:	"by
Riendo:	Laughing
entender.:	to understand.
Digo:	I say
desbordado:	overflowed
momentos.:	moments.
alcanzaban:	they reached
recordaba:	I remembered
algo.:	something.
descompuesto:	decomposed
volvemos:	we return
machetazos.:	machetes
atacar:	attack
afincarse:	settle
mide:	stomach
encontrarla::	find it:
podremos:	we can
mojarse:	get wet
vara:	be
echar:	throw
apoyo:	support
hunde:	dogs
levanta:	get up
proa:	bow
meterse:	get in
borda:	edge
caigo:	I fall
sentencioso:	sententious
«Posible:	"Possible
respondo:	answer
posible»:	possible"
idénticos:	identical
mansedumbre.:	meekness.
irónica:	ironic
considerando:	considering
contratiempo.:	setback.
aceptar:	accept
últimamente:	lately
marchado:	left
augurio.:	best wishes.
parecería:	it would seem
percance:	mishap
mañana.:	tomorrow.
tengamos:	we have
caiga:	fall
inverso:	reverse
remando:	rowing
lleno.:	full.
comenzamos:	we start
marca.:	mark.
hoias.:	hoya
dintel:	lintel
estrecha.:	narrow
jambas:	jambs
erguidos:	erected
Eran:	Were
fuerza.:	force.
advertirla:	warn her
valla:	municipality
seguimos:	we follow
troncos.:	trunks.
examinando:	examining
sigo:	I continue
ironía:	irony
imagino:	I imagine
navegado.:	navigated.
virar:	to turn
evidente:	obvious
ahora.:	now.
recordaría:	I would remember
espolón:	spur
Navegamos:	We sail
encontrarlas.:	find them.
habremos:	we will have
borra:	drill
existen:	there are
superpuestas.:	overlapping.
semejante:	such
aparecido:	appeared
ninguno:	none
absurdo::	absurd:
mareo.:	dizziness.
iguales:	equal
sucesión:	succession
afianzando:	strengthening
apartarla:	put it away
chistar.:	joke
indicaciones:	indications
rayo:	ray
segundos;:	seconds;
145
:	145
distraído:	distracted
cuenta;:	account;
darme:	give me
dudas:	doubts
asaltan:	assault
tronco.:	stem.
constantemente:	constantly
fatigan:	exhausting
adelante.:	forward.
Seguimos:	We follow
interroga.:	question.
despacio:	slowly
infinito.:	infinite.
alargarse:	lengthen
pudiera:	could
verticalmente:	vertically
superpuestas:	overlapping
dibuja:	draw
lenta:	level
acercamos:	we approach
mirada.:	look.
alcanza:	reaches
señalo:	I point out
revueltas:	revolts
bochorno:	embarrassment
arduo:	arduous
proseguimos:	we continue
Culcán...:	Culcan...
emplumadas::	feathered:
serpientes:	snakes
triada:	triad
presididos:	chaired
lanzados:	launched
Guacamayos-
Bólidos:	Macaws-
Racing cars
Cóndores-Mensajeros:	Condors-Messengers
Pájaros-Soles:	Birds-Suns
Águila-Rocío:	Eagle-Dew
Pájaro-Trueno:	Thunder-Bird
majestades:	majesties
desfile:	parade
montañas—:	mountains-
mirarlos:	look at them
dibujados:	drawn
pintados:	painted
ornadas:	ornate
orejas:	ears
aquellas:	those
empinado:	prancing
graznar:	grazier
esquimales:	eskimos
Pájaro-Espíritu:	Spirit-Bird
mundo.:	world.
mitologías:	mythologies
Pájaro:	Bird
desempeñados:	performed
pluralidad:	plurality
espantos:	frights
poniendo:	putting
omnipresencia:	omnipresence
concierto.:	concert.
alborotar:	disturb
espesura:	thickness
garzas:	herons
bandada:	flock
triángulo:	triangle
aplausos.:	applause.
abofetean:	in the palm of your hand
plomizas:	leaden
aletas:	fins
erizando:	erizing
encima:	on
atropellan:	run over
chocan:	they collide
saltan:	they jump
peces:	pieces
cardumen:	shoal
oscurecido:	darkened
migraciones:	migrations
azufre.:	sulfur.
sacarlo:	take it out
enjambres:	swarms
pegar:	to take
bastaría:	would be enough
moverse:	move
apretadas:	tight
mariposas:	butterflies
miríadas:	myriads
revolotean:	they flutter
escorias:	slag
húmeda:	wet
franja:	fringe
pinta:	surface
riberas:	banks
estación:	season
llovido:	rained
anegado.:	waterlogged.
estuvo:	was
caudalosa:	mighty
particularmente:	particularly
crecida:	spate
fibras:	fibers
podrida:	rotten
abrieron:	opened
levantaron:	they lifted
adentro:	inside
crecidas:	floods
plantas:	plants
literalmente:	literally
reventado:	busted
abrazamos:	we hug
apoderarse:	seize
Han:	He
abandonada.:	abandoned.
atracamos:	we dock
asomarse:	lean out
Acaba:	It's over
144
:	144
quiero.:	wanna.
afinco:	hard
pertenecen.:	they belong.
servirlos—.:	serve them.
galeras:	guys
espaldero:	espalier
bogavante:	lobster
haciéndome:	making me
dilema::	dilemma:
excluye:	excludes
Mundo:	World
Reino:	Kingdom
plantea:	poses
partes.:	parties.
fingimiento:	pretense
Pruebas;:	Evidence;
amarla:	love her
consciente:	conscious
Vuelvo:	I'm back
amanecidos.:	dawns.
albor:	dawn
burbujeantes:	bubbly
macerar:	macerate
recogiendo:	picking
Diluvio:	Flood
Rúbricas:	Rubrics
ostenta:	boasts
escapé:	exhaust
Sonrío:	I smile
apremio.:	pressure.
dolorosos:	painful
embates:	clashes
duro:	stand
corto:	short
vellón:	fleece
pálpito:	palpito
sopesar:	balance
tiñe:	dyes
circunda:	surrounds
volverme:	come back
torrentes:	torrents
hundirme:	inside
muslos;:	thighs;
brisa:	breeze
cierne.:	hovers.
hablan:	they talk
inútiles:	useless
Huyo:	That one
música.:	music.
hago:	do
bolge.:	area.
tenazas:	tongs
Miedo:	Fear
miedo::	fear:
asalta:	assault
edición.:	edition.
imponga:	impose
pienso:	I think
buscar;:	look for;
vengo:	come
canse:	get tired
alejarlo:	push it away
conjurarlo:	conjure it
posibilidad:	possibility
superstición:	superstition
vaga:	vacancy
cumplir:	achieve
precaución:	caution
elección:	choice
umbrales:	thresholds
laberinto.:	maze.
abrió:	opened
romántico:	romantic
concierto:	concert
falso:	false
acierto:	success
zanjado:	ditched
agüero.:	omen.
serán:	will be
vigas:	beams
tejen:	save
alivio.:	relief.
deliciosa:	delicious
Seguro:	Insurance
aldea...:	village...
siguiendo:	following
desprendo:	I detach
veré:	I will see
Llegado:	arrived
agarrara:	will grab
brújula:	compass
ramas.:	remaining.
abovedado:	vaulted
pasadizo:	anecdote
identificación:	ID
incisa:	engraved
Buscaré:	I will search
cordel:	string
trazada:	traced
muralla:	wall
—aquella:	-that
valladar:	fence
tenemos:	have
guiarlo:	guide him
comprometo:	I commit
contrafuertes:	buttresses
navegado:	navigated
rumbo.:	course.
remeros:	rowers
seguiré:	I will continue
explicar:	explain
flautas:	flutes
tambores:	drums
colección:	collection
destinados:	intended
encontré:	I found
llevarme:	take me
143
:	143
mayores.:	older.
patronas:	cartridges
advocación:	dedication
Inés:	Agnes
fundado:	founded
Otro:	Other
sembraba:	sowed
levantaba:	lifted
establecida:	established
inexplorados:	unexplored
revela:	reveals
posee:	owns
repiten:	they repeat
puestas.:	set.
bragas:	panties
barbudos:	bearded
añadiendo:	adding
Carpintero:	Carpenter
así»:	So"
muere:	die
caño.:	spout.
buitres:	vultures
encontrara:	will find
llevada:	carried
curiara:	court
pusieron:	they put
dominios:	domains
hollar:	cases
pretendieron:	they intended
aviso:	Notice
tremendo:	tremendous
hermanos:	siblings
tórax:	chest
flechas:	arrows
confirma:	confirm
respuestas:	answers
trueque.:	barter.
mercancías:	goods
navegados:	navigated
remontar:	reassemble
Aguinaldos:	bonuses
zapatero:	shoe
aindiado:	further
lento:	this
ataúdes:	coffins
medía:	average
carpintero:	carpenter
manatíes:	manatees
Pescador:	Fisherman
Ahí:	There
rato—.:	mouse-.
comensales:	diners
vasos:	vases
Pido:	I ask
cenizas.:	ashes
grisura:	torn
arrugada:	wrinkled
vejez:	old age
resplandeciente:	resplendent
rescoldo:	ember
sabiduría:	wisdom
ardorosa:	ardent
lumbre:	fire
desconocidas.:	unknown.
bellotas:	acorns
danta:	interest
pernil:	ham
chisporrotea:	sizzles
chimenea:	chimney
vainilla:	in vain
terrateniente.:	landowner.
poseedor:	holder
ello;:	it;
viento.:	wind.
ramas:	remaining
arrojando:	throwing
rezando:	praying
proclama:	proclamation
hato:	there
horcones:	forks
cobija:	blanket
limpia:	clean
tomarlo::	take it:
deslindes.:	demarcations.
cercados:	fenced
concepto:	concept
innato:	innate
mudar:	to change
estuario:	estuary
inmensas.:	immense.
transporte:	transport
precarios:	precarious
cultivado:	cultivated
sustos:	scares
enrolladas:	rolled up
hamacas:	hammocks
largas:	long
echándose:	laying down
consideran:	consider
naturalidad:	naturalness
jornadas:	days
doce:	sweet
hermana:	sister
solteras:	single
compró:	bought
siglo.:	century.
frascos:	jars
medicinas:	medicines
aceites:	oils
bálsamos:	balms
pólvora:	gunpowder
latas:	cans
estantes:	bookshelves
rincones:	corners
rollos:	rolls
mixta:	mixed
comedor:	dining room
transformada:	transformed
catedral.:	cathedral.
resonancia:	resonance
voces:	you
tinaja:	jar
matas;:	fed;
guarda:	guard
142
:	142
viejos.:	old
cromos:	trading cards
cándido:	candid
habitaciones:	rooms
alejándose:	moving away
correas:	straps
reventarles:	burst them
llenan:	fill
pesaran:	retirement
empila:	stacked
mozos:	guys
maletas:	suitcases
agarra:	grab
importancia.:	importance.
oscura:	dark
acercado:	approached
enorme:	huge
Allá:	There
viento:	wind
mecidas:	measures
tejado:	roof
sorpresa::	surprise:
dolorosa:	painful
detuve:	I stopped
diciendo:	saying
guiaba:	guided
muchacho:	young guy
muerte.:	death.
derrota:	defeat
vencido:	won
retarla:	challenge her
mismo::	same:
otorgarse:	be granted
mejillas.:	cheeks.
nariz:	nose
desfiguro:	disfigure
detener:	arrest
invocando:	invoking
morían:	they died
sabían:	they knew
muertes:	deaths
causaron:	caused
cuerpo.:	body.
impuestas:	imposed
mutilaciones:	mutilations
sangrientas:	bloody
ablaciones:	ablations
Puedo:	Can
desmenuzado:	crumbled
escuadrado:	squared
castrado;:	castrated;
Tal:	Of
viejísimo:	very old
remembranza:	remembrance
arrancado:	torn off
haberle:	have him
pedernal:	flint
flacas:	skinny
costillas:	ribs
levantando:	lifting
flecharlo:	arrow it
desnudado:	stripped
Pienso:	I think
aduanas:	customs
almacenes:	warehouses
caminando:	walking
seguí:	I continued
crucé:	crossing
amaneció:	it dawned
Incapaz:	Unable
dormidos.:	asleep
hospitales:	hospitals
funerarias:	funeral homes
bancos:	banks
desiertas:	deserted
lonjas:	markets
anduve:	I walked
regresaría:	I would return
huí:	I fled
vestí:	I dressed
advertencia.:	warning.
horrenda:	horrible
llegara:	will arrive
echada:	cast
sabía:	knew
Asunción:	Assumption
artículo—:	article-
—decía:	—he said
buscador:	seeker
Petroglifos.:	Petroglyphs.
emprendido:	undertaken
entrecana.:	grey-haired
lucía:	lucia
tomada:	outlet
él.»:	he."
retrato:	portrait
conocimos;:	we met;
«Creo:	"Believe
barato:	AFFORDABLE
impreso:	printed
boletín:	bulletin
Abriendo:	Opening
verdadero.:	TRUE.
dios:	God
suscripción:	subscription
aceptado:	accepted
sorteando:	raffling
horas.:	hours.
asiento:	seat
compartiera:	would share
monja:	only
suscrita:	subscribed
religiosa:	religious
pequeña:	small
velador.:	pedestal table.
hallaba:	found
publicación:	publication
tomó:	took
pensamientos:	thoughts
141
:	141
favorables.:	favorable.
recobrado:	recovered
sintió:	felt
oficio.:	job.
instrumento:	instrument
tomarse:	take
podía:	could
amenazadoramente:	threateningly
cerraba:	closed
asimilaba:	assimilated
cortada:	cut
espíritu::	spirit:
claridad:	clarity
sorprendente:	surprising
cobraba:	charged
tuviera—:	had—
personificándose:	personifying
conjunto:	set
Sagitario:	Sagittarius
«Este:	"It is
consultas.:	consultations.
preferible:	preferable
pago:	pay
poseída:	possessed
prostituta:	prostitute
Cualquier:	Any
desprecio.:	contempt.
volvía:	came back
triste:	sad
envuelve.:	wraps
une:	a
definitiva:	definitive
sorpresas:	surprises
decepción:	disappointment
inhabitual:	unusual
abstinencia:	abstinence
debida:	due
facilidad:	ease
quiso:	wanted
accedí:	I agreed
manejó:	management
hábilmente:	skillfully
comprometería:	would compromise
afirmó:	stated
consecuencia;:	consequence;
privarme:	deprive myself
necio:	foolish
trató:	deal
holgadas:	baggy
ropas:	clothes
ponerse:	put on
permiso:	permission
llenó:	full
terminadas.:	finished.
astrológicas:	astrological
consultas:	queries
temprano:	early
alevosía:	treachery
entereza:	fortitude
socavar:	undermine
arreglarse:	get ready
modos:	modes
moderación.:	moderation.
cuidando:	caring
miseria:	misery
confesar:	confess
crédito:	credit
seducción:	seduction
intentos:	attempts
frustrar:	frustrate
decidido:	decided
margarina;:	Margarine;
hedor:	stench
alumbrada:	lighting
compañía:	company
toleraba:	tolerated
realmente.:	really.
cabaña:	cabin
abrazado:	embraced
fiebre:	fever
efectos:	effects
verdaderos.:	true.
magnánimamente:	magnanimously
atribuyéndolo:	attributing it
enfermara:	nurse
echaba:	threw
rectamente—.:	uprightly-.
limpios:	clean
mentir:	lie
confianza:	trust
escándalo:	scandal
inocente:	innocent
hablaba:	spoke
Nicolás.:	Nicholas.
rojizo:	reddish
paredón:	wall
combates:	fighting
remozado:	renovated
lujuria.:	lust.
pecado:	sin
castigan:	punish
llagas:	sores
humores:	moods
siguientes:	following
arrepentimiento:	repentance
preparándose:	getting ready
plegaria:	prayer
unía:	united
juntos:	together
obligación:	obligation
reñido:	close
desamparo.:	helplessness.
tinieblas:	darkness
dejando:	leaving
cedería:	would give in
voluntad:	willpower
tocador:	dresser
mármol:	marble
revueltos:	scrambled
afeites:	you leave
percibir:	perceive
calados:	silent
cintas:	ribbons
cubrecama:	bedspread
firmemente:	firmly
rezaba:	prayed
amenazaba:	threatened
Dios:	God
agarrarse:	hold
aterrorizada:	terrified
sufrimientos::	sufferings:
indecibles:	unspeakable
producía:	produced
desdoblamiento:	unfolding
140
:	140
impedirlo.:	prevent it.
luchaba:	fought
burdel:	brothel
condujera:	would drive
parecida:	similar
incitación:	incitement
aquiescencia:	acquiescence
afirmada:	asserted
definido:	defined
escozor:	stinging
muslos:	thighs
conocida:	known
apesadumbra.:	sorrow
discutir.:	to discuss.
escucharla.:	listen to it.
hablarle.:	talk to him
fuera.:	out.
nueve:	nine
Siete:	Seven
cerca.:	fence.
haré:	I will
te:	the
consulta:	consultation
«Si:	"And
voz::	voice:
libro.:	book.
socarronamente:	slyly
cercano.:	nearby.
librarse.»:	get free."
circunstancias:	circumstances
vinculada:	linked
Psicoanálisis::	Psychoanalysis:
afecto.:	keen.
ningún:	none
desea:	want
perspectiva:	perspective
ocultas::	hidden:
Ciencias:	Sciences
posición.:	position.
Egipto::	Egypt:
«CÁRCEL.:	"JAIL.
sueños::	dreams:
interpretación:	interpretation
hojear:	leaf through
librería:	bookshop
entro:	within
pensé:	think
Carceri:	Prisons
di:	Of
Invenzioni:	Inventions
aguafuerte:	etching
colorido:	colorful
caballo.:	horse.
sordo:	deaf
galope:	gallop
sonaba:	it sounded
subterráneos:	underground
frente.:	forehead.
colocados:	placed
desviación:	deviation
ligera:	light
lontananza:	distance
multiplicaban:	they multiplied
suplicio:	torture
mecían:	rocked
pilares:	pillars
catedrales:	cathedrals
naves:	ships
prisión:	prison
soñé:	I dreamed
Anoche:	Last night
augurios:	omens
Busco:	I'm looking
prensa.:	press.
horóscopos:	horoscopes
excelente.:	excellent.
vitrina;:	showcase;
expuesta:	exposed
serpiente:	snake
agüero:	omen
araña:	spider
presagios:	omens
imposibilidad:	impossibility
agujas:	needles
Abetos:	Fir trees
Contemplo:	I contemplate
resuello.:	wheeze.
asomaba:	appeared
humo:	in it
fogatas:	campfires
mojadas:	wet
leñas:	firewood
tacto:	touch
húmedas:	wet
Algunas:	Some
aplacamiento.:	appeasement.
procura:	search
brumas:	mists
adormilan:	sleepy
otoño:	autumn
herrumbrosos:	rusty
conducen:	drive
caminatas:	walks
interminables:	endless
emprendo:	I undertake
encaja:	fits
viene.:	he comes.
Tarda:	Afternoon
suspende:	suspend
quién:	who
¡Ay:	Yes
alusiones::	allusions:
lacerantes:	tearing
cargarse:	load
tierna:	tender
encontrarme:	find me
amargura:	bitterness
fortuitos—.:	fortuitous.
asombrosa:	amazing
trastocaron:	disrupted
—día:	-day
casualidad:	chance
misteriosa:	mysterious
abriera:	would open
hagiografía:	hagiography
iniciales:	initials
estampan:	stamp
morado:	purple
terciopelo:	velvet
encuadernado:	bound
Vidas:	Lives
139
:	139
Servando:	Serving
maravilladas:	amazed
lecturas:	readings
contemplo:	I contemplate
anunciando:	advertising
moblaje:	furniture
paquete:	package
cazuela:	casserole
armarios.:	wardrobes.
cocinan:	they cook
fuman:	they smoke
agujereadas:	perforated
suelas:	soles
nieve:	snow
camisa:	shirt
lavan:	stage
acercando:	approaching
lanzado:	launched
masa:	time
cordeles:	twine
entretejen:	interweave
calles:	streets
ir.:	and
semana.:	week.
cobrarlos:	charge them
desgana:	reluctance
ejecuto:	I execute
instrumentación:	instrumentation
encargos:	charges
pequeños:	small
medida:	measure
cuantía:	amount
necesito:	need
divorciado:	divorced
aspirantes:	aspirants
infructuosamente:	vainly
buscado:	sought
estudios.:	studies.
asistente:	assistant
antiguo:	ancient
publicitaria:	advertising
perdona:	sorry
Tampoco:	Neither
derramadas.:	spilled.
margarinas:	margarine
alfombras:	rugs
Catorce:	Fourteen
estudiantes:	students
experto:	expert
advirtiendo:	warning
recibe:	receive
luminosos.:	luminous.
anuncios:	advertisements
enrojecidas:	reddened
aceras:	sidewalks
encontrándome:	finding me
firmar:	sign
firmo:	the company
secretarios:	secretaries
interrogo:	I ask
aguardo:	I wait
puertas:	doors
viajo:	I travel
esquinas:	corners
doblo:	doublo
eliminada:	eliminated
comedia:	comedy
antes.:	before.
ánimo:	cheer up
embrollo:	imbroglio
negaba—.:	he denied.
procedimiento:	procedure
amoralidad:	amorality
—una:	-a
tornear:	turn
plenamente:	fully
darse:	give
sacrificando:	sacrificing
vacilado:	hesitated
santuario:	sanctuary
pasaba:	was passing
impuesta:	imposed
cotidiano:	everyday
torturara:	will torture
Secesión:	Secession
escenario:	scenery
vendimia.:	vintage.
viña:	came
edifica:	build
Escrituras:	Scriptures
despreciable:	negligible
gravidez.:	pregnancy.
indicio:	indication
explota:	explode
enredado:	tangled
simplificar:	simplify
alarma.:	alarm.
embarazo:	pregnancy
nación.:	nation.
jueces:	judges
herida:	wound
representando:	representing
empeñada:	pawned
carmín:	carmine
vestida:	dressed
encarnizada:	fierce
difuminar:	blur
internacional:	International
vil:	will
relato:	report
Tuve:	Had
abominación.:	abomination.
transgresor:	offender
considerarme:	consider me
Pastores:	Shepherds
alboroto:	riot
edificante:	edifying
ridículo:	ridiculous
gastado:	spent
perdonaba:	forgave
instancia:	instance
trampa:	trap
Había:	There was
tembloroso.:	trembling.
dejándome:	leaving me
dobló:	folded
reportaje:	reportage
devueltas:	returned
138
:	138
octubre):	October)
cómitre.:	comitre
mazo:	the little one
Hombre-Ninguno:	Man-None
Hombre-Avispa:	Wasp-Man
condición:	condition
acepto:	I accept
Génesis.:	Genesis.
luminarias:	luminaries
futuro:	future
intacto;:	intact;
creo:	believe
nacido.:	born.
envejece:	gets old
cansa:	tired
estilo:	style
geometría:	geometry
contemplarlo;:	contemplate it;
futuro.:	future.
pretérito:	past tense
barajado:	shuffled
posibles—.:	possible—.
Icarias:	Ikarias
permitidas:	permitted
Utopías:	Utopias
—del:	-of the
porvenir:	future
acordándome:	remembering
lugar::	place:
componían:	they composed
ornamentos:	ornaments
limón:	lemon
recio:	tough
sabor:	flavor
dividido.:	divided.
contado:	counted
laberintos:	labyrinths
laberinto:	maze
espacio.:	space.
lanzadas:	thrown
frases:	phrases
cornisas:	cornices
pregonados:	heralded
títulos:	titles
expuestas:	exposed
cubiertas:	covers
anuncia::	announces:
lugares—.:	places—.
muevan:	move
islas:	islands
higos:	figs
caigan:	fall
estrellas:	stars
Sello:	Seal
Sexto:	Sixth
apertura:	opening
devuelto:	returned
ocurrir.:	occur.
consignas:	slogans
frutas:	fruits
simiente:	seed
publicidad;:	advertising;
tensos:	tense
interpelaciones:	interpellations
servidumbres;:	easements;
colectividad:	community
reprimenda:	reprimand
miedo.:	fear.
atajado:	shortcut
impulso:	impulse
rebeldía:	rebellion
profunda:	deep
apetencia:	appetite
destinos.:	destinations.
pocos:	few
sometida:	subdued
forjarse:	forge
humano:	human
propuesta:	proposal
máxima:	maximum
comprendido:	understood
Frente:	Forehead
biblioteca.:	library.
yacían:	lay
textos:	texts
profundo:	deep
esencias:	essences
enseñado:	taught
fortuitos:	fortuitous
resueltos:	resolved
llevaban:	they carried
reflexiones:	reflections
Estas:	It is
creadores.:	creators.
imitando:	imitating
Occidente:	West
renovar:	renew
Querían:	they wanted
perseguida.:	persecuted.
opuesto:	opposite
cartesiano:	Cartesian
cogitante:	thinking
calificador:	qualifier
colocaban:	they placed
«bárbaras»:	«barbarians»
calificadas:	qualified
—
cosas:	—
things
cumplían:	they fulfilled
bárbaras:	barbarians
barbarie:	barbarism
Buscaban:	They were looking
conocer:	know
Método:	Method
Discurso:	Speech
clavos:	nails
137
:	137
erizados:	bristling
fetiches:	fetishes
africanos:	Africans
blandían:	the mixture
risible:	laughable
resultaba:	it turned out
razón.:	reason.
debieran:	should
fervores:	fervor
savias:	swordfish
rejuvenecerse:	rejuvenate
cansada:	tired
cultura:	culture
veinte:	twenty
Durante:	During
primitivos—.:	primitives—.
batería:	battery
compositores:	composers
numerosos:	numerous
instintivas:	instinctive
energías:	energies
añoranza:	yearning
perdida:	lost
elocuencia:	eloquence
pintores:	painters
interrogaban:	they interrogated
terribles:	terrible
enigmáticos:	enigmatic
adoradores:	worshipers
vaciados:	emptied
difuntos:	deceased
ídolos:	idols
exhiben:	exhibit
pintura:	paint
vitrina:	showcase
detengo:	I stop
públicas.:	public.
plazas:	places
bosta:	they will be
zócalos:	sockets
magistralmente:	masterfully
vacas:	cows
cubriendo:	covering
fueran:	were
monumentos:	monuments
soñando:	ringing
apisonar—.:	अपिसोनार—.
comunica:	communicate
seda:	this
barreras:	barriers
exasperados:	exasperated
contactos:	contacts
abrazos:	hugs
propiciando:	enabling
apagan:	turn off
rítmicos.:	rhythmic.
valores:	values
reducido:	reduced
compás:	compass
movida:	moved
especie:	species
ingredientes:	ingredients
encajados:	embedded
intríngulis:	intrigued
rodea.:	surrounds
Reconocido:	Recognized
filtraciones.:	leaks.
irregularmente:	irregularly
caverna:	cave
bóveda:	vault
remeda:	remedy
raso:	satin
burgués»—.:	bourgeois"-.
«espíritu:	"spirit
llamaba:	called
reacción:	reaction
reciente:	recent
fecha:	date
fiel:	fell
—aunque:	-although
rancios:	stale
locura:	craziness
nada—:	nothing-
—muniqueses:	—muniques
rococós:	rococo
castillos:	castles
panorámicas:	panoramic
vistas:	views
traje:	lasts
Hornig:	Horny
cochero:	coachman
Baviera:	Bavaria
agrandadas:	enlarged
gruta:	cave
mármol.:	marble.
intermitentemente:	intermittently
rozados:	rubbed
pezones:	nipples
giratorio:	rotary
montados:	mounted
móvil:	mobile
anatómicas:	anatomical
hipocampos:	hippocampi
encierran:	enclose
iluminadas:	illuminated
grutas:	caves
ahondan:	they delve
trozos:	pieces
estuco:	stucco
construcción:	construction
montado:	mounted
estrado:	platform
astrágalo.:	astragalus.
negras:	black
vestidas:	dressed
cornisa:	cornice
caracol:	snail
clepsidra:	hourglass
metrónomo:	metronome
hormigas:	ants
comido:	eaten
costillar:	rib
exangüe:	bloodless
Gorgona:	Gorgon
ignorar:	ignore
desollados:	skinned
desesperanza:	hopelessness
agobiados:	overwhelmed
pétreos:	stony
falos:	will fall
sostienen:	hold
muletas:	crutches
ciclistas:	cyclists
bicicletas:	bicycles
osamentas:	bones
áridas:	arid
llanuras:	plains
escenografías:	scenery
sótano:	basement
divertirse:	enjoy
góticos.:	goths.
caracteres:	characters
luminosa:	bright
veníamos:	we came
próximo:	next
fatigados:	fatigued
tristes:	sad
desamparados:	helpless
hora—:	time—
fuguen:	the fugue
tampoco:	neither
fuerzas:	forces
repondrán:	will replenish
Vivieron:	They lived
nutricias.:	nutricies.
empresas:	companies
vendieron:	they sold
extenuados:	exhausted
ahogar:	drown
acabará:	will end
circundante:	surrounding
anteriores:	previous
culturas:	cultures
retazos:	scraps
hechas:	made
fachadas:	facades
136
:	136
encrespamiento:	inking
ocurrencia:	occurrence
estilo.:	style.
sustituirlos:	replace them
arquitectura:	architecture
secarse:	dry up
acaban:	end
Renacimiento:	Renaissance
acantos:	acanthus
ejecutados:	executed
clásicos:	classics
entablamentos:	entablatures
agonizantes:	dying
edificios:	buildings
enfermas:	sick
partes:	parts
tenidas:	had
colgaba:	hung
coagulada:	coagulated
pringoso:	catch
caza:	hunting
trofeo:	trophy
figuración:	figuration
edades:	ages
traído:	brought
ornamento:	ornament
probablemente:	probably
aplicado:	applied
arquitecto:	architect
bucráneo:	bucranium
triglifos:	triglyphs
antiguo::	ancient:
asienta:	nods
implicaciones.:	implications.
medido:	measured
alcance:	range
prácticas:	practices
luciferada:	luciferated
propiciatoria:	propitiatory
percusión:	percussion
reto:	challenge
alianza:	alliance
gaje:	grows
baño:	bathroom
enmascarado:	masked
purificación:	purification
tumba:	grave
desconozca::	don't know:
siglos.:	ages.
cuarenta:	forty
inscripciones:	registrations
desconocido:	a stranger
reducidas:	reduced
tradiciones:	traditions
conservar:	keep
orgullo:	pride
enjoyaron.:	they bejeweled
almendra:	almond
abeto:	fir
cubren:	cover
bautismo:	baptism
almendras:	almonds
llevan:	they carry
Epifanía:	Epiphany
Buscan:	They search
gestos.:	gestures.
propios:	own
milenaria:	millennial
simbólica:	symbolic
ignorantes:	ignorant
arroz:	rice
puñados:	handfuls
reciben:	receive
anillos:	rings
intercambian:	they exchange
casan:	feet
hacen.:	do.
misterio:	mystery
asisten:	assistant
inconsciencia:	unconsciousness
advierto:	I warn
lengua:	language
canta:	sing
congregados:	congregants
forasteros:	outsiders
extraños:	strangers
percatarme:	notice
acompaña.:	accompanies
muerto:	dead
escucharse:	listen
hombres::	men:
mayoría:	most
ininteligibilidad:	unintelligibility
nostri.:	our.
Dei:	Of the
atris:	black
—plantatus:	- planted
multiplicatur::	is multiplied:
Libani:	Lebanon
cedrus:	cedar
—
Sicut:	-
Like
florebit::	will bloom
gregoriano::	Gregorian:
muertas.:	dead
repleto:	full
foso:	pit
ensancha:	widens
fieles:	faithful
malentendido.:	misunderstanding.
representación:	representation
escuelas:	schools
latín:	Latin
ajena.:	foreign
belleza:	beauty
sacerdote.:	priest.
entiende:	understand
nocturno:	night
congregado:	congregated
nadie:	nobody
cirios::	candles:
amarillor:	yellower
refleja:	reflects
oficiante:	officiant
vueltas:	turns
deambulatorio.:	ambulatory
litúrgicos:	liturgical
latines:	Latin
resuenan:	resonate
profundos:	deep
órgano.:	organ.
notas:	notes
invitan:	invite
incienso:	incense
ahumadas:	smoked
Llego:	Arrive
dormido:	asleep
zapatos:	shoes
tiembla:	trembles
socavón:	sinkhole
comprada;:	purchased;
raído:	raido
gabán:	overcoat
ladrillo:	brick
garita:	sentry box
avanzado:	advanced
hornacina:	niche
paradas.:	stops.
momias:	mummies
aturdidos:	stunned
soldadas:	welded
escaparates:	escapes
resguardados:	sheltered
espacios:	spaces
angostos:	narrow
Descubro:	I find out
prisa.:	hurry.
inválidos:	invalid
135
:	135
comercios:	shops
pegado:	glued
progresar:	to progress
ajustarme:	adjust
logro:	achievement
semáforo.:	traffic light.
semáforo:	traffic light
agitación:	agitation
restablece:	resets
reinante;:	reigning;
pulsación:	pulsation
constancia:	constancy
tranvía:	tram
bocas:	mouths
cruzar:	cross
permite:	allows
encenderse:	light
esquina:	corner
corresponde:	corresponds
orgánicas.:	organic.
voluntades:	wills
acera:	pavement
vienen:	they come
rodean:	surround
descubrir:	discover
costumbre:	habit
adquirido:	acquired
tarde):	late)
(Más:	(Further
peldaños:	steps
escaleras.:	stairs.
bajé:	I went down
necesitado:	needy
Cansado:	Tired
sí.:	Yeah.
cerrando:	closing
levantó:	rose
remoto;:	remote;
contemplar:	contemplate
fijó:	fixed
calmada:	calm
gemidos.:	moans.
adolorida:	sore
mirarme:	look at me
infantil:	children's
humilde:	humble
rompió:	broke
avilantez:	degrade
defenderla:	defend her
naciendo:	being born
doblándose:	bending
desolado:	bleak
abrazó:	hug
Temis:	It was
embarazo.:	pregnancy.
pregunté:	I asked
Justicia.:	Justice.
encarnación:	incarnation
Poder:	Can
femenina:	feminine
majestuosa:	majestic
estatua:	the state
Parecía:	It seemed
Átala.:	Atala.
ridiculizante:	ridiculous
término:	term
designaba:	designated
impedir:	prevent
embrolladas:	muddled
tramitaciones:	procedures
pérfidos:	perfidious
legales:	legal
lazos:	ties
confundiría:	would confuse
sinuosos:	sinuous
enredados:	tangled
atado:	tied
advirtió:	warned
modelarla:	with models
vestido:	dress
negrura:	blackness
atiesada:	Atisara
acusadora:	accuser
Helada:	Frost
fiscales.:	prosecutors.
abogados:	lawyers
tribunales:	courts
registro:	record
bajó:	low
cayeron:	they fell
paroxismo...:	paroxysm...
ascendía:	ascended
monólogo:	monologue
furia:	rage
viviendo:	living
lacerarse:	lacerate
aplazados:	postponed
atadura:	tie
dramáticas:	dramatic
inhibiciones:	inhibitions
Sospecho:	I suspect
justeza.:	fairness.
apoyando:	supporting
inmóvil:	still
delgados:	thin
gestos::	gestures:
impresionó:	impressed
escenario.:	scenery.
alzó:	raised
trágica:	tragic
Entonces:	So
inquebrantable.:	unwavering.
decisión:	decision
expone:	exposes
alterado:	changed
resuelto:	resolved
tono:	application
repetí:	I repeated
atención.:	attention.
escuchar:	listen
colocó:	placed
amenazada:	threatened
viéndose:	seeing each other
asentado:	settled
firme:	firm
distensión:	distension
serpiente.:	snake.
rastreada:	tracked
Terrenal:	Earthly
Paraíso:	Paradise
plantando:	planting
prestaban:	they lent
134
:	134
desconcierto:	bewilderment
aumentar:	increase
divirtiendo:	having fun
aposento:	chamber
caballería.:	chivalry.
secretos:	secrets
callaban:	they were silent
callarse:	shut up
debían:	they had to
pruebas:	evidence
prestigios:	impressive
arcano:	arcane
comunes;:	common;
asidero:	handle
pintaba:	painted
llaves.:	keys.
requería:	required
explicación:	explanation
incomprensible:	incomprehensible
imprevisto:	sudden
presentando:	presenting
saqué:	I took out
decisivo:	decisive
asestar:	deal
enfriar.:	cool.
puestos:	positions
vinos:	wines
departamento:	department
dispuesta:	willing
delicada:	delicate
conclusión:	conclusion
reconfortante:	comforting
faltaría:	would be missing
previsto:	predicted
abrazo:	hug
anticipación:	anticipation
suyas:	his
colocadas:	placed
pantuflas:	slippers
velador:	pedestal table
mejores:	best
sábanas:	bed sheets
arreglada:	fixed
magnánimo.:	magnanimous.
sollozante:	sobbing
vendría:	would come
castigada:	punished
comprensión:	comprehension
endulzando:	sweetening
aceptar.:	accept.
alguno:	some
generosa:	generous
compasión:	compassion
mejor.:	better.
verdad—.:	TRUE-.
moradas:	purple
devuelta:	returned
regresara:	will return
contemplaba:	contemplated
—desde:	-from
engañosas:	misleading
engaño:	deception
falacias:	fallacies
significaban:	they meant
desprecio:	contempt
vicios:	vices
desprendimiento:	detachment
narrarle:	narrate
Sigue.»:	Go on."
Sigue...:	Go on...
«Sigue...:	"Go on...
operación:	operation
queriendo:	wanting
gimiente:	moaning
estertor:	rattle
acertaba:	was right
dibujadas:	drawn
venas:	is coming
jadeante:	panting
desplomada:	collapsed
físico.:	physical.
impudor:	impudence
desorden:	disorder
juvenil:	youth
astrales:	astral
figuraciones:	figurations
adornado:	decorated
hablé:	I spoke
injustificada.:	unjustified.
aparentemente:	apparently
ruptura:	rupture
acarrea:	carries
trastornos:	disorders
pereza:	laziness
cumple:	meets
imagen:	image
transformado:	transformed
distante;:	distant;
detalle:	detail
hincada:	kneeling
revelado:	revealed
añadir:	add
vindicativa:	vindictive
llevado:	carried
séptimo:	seventh
fornicación:	fornication
reducida:	reduced
antepuesta:	anteposed
Culpé:	Culpe
dinero.:	money.
innegable:	undeniable
abyecta:	abject
asistiera:	would attend
pensado:	thought
largando:	letting go
precipité:	precipitate
contenerse:	contain
cólera:	anger
estallido:	pop
adelantarme:	get ahead
apretar:	squeeze
hundido:	sunken
crispadas:	tense
mucho—:	a lot-
ocultaba:	hid
defecto:	flaw
dientes:	teeth
dejaba:	left
sardónica:	sardonic
mueca:	grin
trágicas:	tragic
yesosa:	of sauce
palabras;:	words;
miraba:	looked
ridículo.:	ridiculous.
oportunidad.:	chance.
pérfida:	perfidious
evidenciado:	evidenced
equívoco:	misconception
querida.:	dear.
133
:	133
entera:	whole
nación:	nation
ironía::	irony:
malvada:	evil
vislumbrar:	glimpse
impostura.:	imposture.
opinión:	opinion
atribuir:	assign
vengando:	avenging
entender::	to understand:
entiendan:	understand
interesados:	interested
basta:	it just is
regresando:	returning
derribara:	would knock down
voluntariamente:	voluntarily
abandonó:	abandonment
Completa:	Complete
primitivos.:	primitives.
cosmogónicas:	cosmogonic
confiada:	confident
aprovecha:	take advantage
astrología:	astrology
estudiosa:	studious
relaciones.:	relations.
índole:	nature
justificar:	justify
erudición:	erudition
falsa:	false
despliegue:	deployment
evidentemente:	evidently
debidos:	due
ejemplos:	examples
Pitágoras:	Pythagoras
nombra:	name
indostánicos:	Hindustani
cita:	dream
movimientos;:	movements;
sinfonía:	symphony
lluvia»:	rain"
especialista:	specialist
risibles:	laughable
errores:	errors
cometiendo:	committing
aterradora:	terrifying
intrepidez:	fearlessness
planetaria.:	planetary.
jerarquía:	hierarchy
escalas:	scales
relacionaron:	related
antigüedad:	antique
—pues:	-well
astrológico:	astrological
enfoque:	approach
consideraba:	considered
organográfico:	organographic
estudiaba:	I studied
colaboradora:	collaborator
sorpresivo:	surprising
declaró:	declared
amante.:	lover.
tenida:	had
relata:	reports
revelaciones:	revelations
despreciable—:	negligible-
tabloide:	tabloid
—tomado:	-taken
artículo:	article
título:	title
escándalo.:	scandal.
explotación:	exploitation
coloquio:	colloquium
fotografía:	photograph
trozo:	piece
entrega:	delivery
encendidos:	on
violento:	violent
ademán:	gesture
decirle:	tell
dándome:	giving me
cariño:	dear
temidos:	feared
retarda:	slows down
distracción:	distraction
alegro:	glad
sorpresa.:	surprise.
deslizado:	slipped
vecino:	neighbor
—un:	— and
recorte:	cutout
inclinado:	inclined
entrar:	to enter
vez...:	time...
devuelve:	returns
maravillas.:	wonders.
falsas:	fake
arsenales:	arsenals
producido:	produced
sutil:	subtle
inteligente:	intelligent
literatura:	literature
Toda:	All
muerto.:	dead.
entrepaños:	shelves
alineados:	aligned
aquello.:	that.
recuperar:	recover
Ninguno:	None
otro.:	other.
entrara:	will enter
potestad:	power
arrogarse:	assume
atreviera:	dared
indignado:	indignant
extrañamente:	strangely
miré:	Look
reposo»:	repose"
«Tómese:	«Take
empresa::	enterprise:
candilejas.:	footlights.
apagar:	to switch off
telón:	curtain
Ayuntamiento:	City hall
impresión:	impression
vestido.:	dress.
modelado:	modeling
colgada:	hung
escalinata:	staircase
entendidos:	understood
guiños:	winks
tribulaciones:	tribulations
reposo:	repose
fatiga:	fatigue
persuasivamente:	persuasively
Protagonista:	Hero
relumbre:	glare
quitar:	remove
reiteración:	reiteration
agotarse:	run out
presiente:	present
engrandecida:	enlarged
Griseldis:	in Griseld
lecho:	litter
hablarle:	talk to him
oyendo:	hearing
Penélope:	Penelope
Brabante:	Brabant
bodas;:	white;
ración—:	ration-
desflo:	deflo
—esta:	-this
alegría:	happiness
estremecida:	extremecidal
132
:	132
aplaudir.:	applaud.
ganas:	desire
dan:	And
dicha:	bliss
estampa:	print
ofrecerse:	offer
inteligentes:	smart
artimañas:	tricks
atenta:	attentive
admirar:	admire
haciéndose:	making
guardar:	keep
dándose:	giving
insinuante:	insinuating
diversa:	different
matizada:	nuanced
actuación:	performance
actualidades:	news
camarógrafo:	cameraman
esbelta:	slender
próxima:	next
acompañará:	will accompany
declaración:	declaration
breve:	brief
citó:	cited
ingeniosa:	ingenious
coloca:	put
sorprendido;:	surprised;
íntimo:	intimate
contempla:	contemplate
golosina:	candy
cartera;:	briefcase;
oportuna:	timely
oblea:	wafer
importante:	important
jaqueca:	migraine
alivia:	relieve
acecha;:	stalks;
fotógrafo:	photographer
entona:	gas
inasible;:	ungraspable;
ubicua:	ubiquitous
resurgir:	resurface
desaparece:	disappears
desliza:	slide
partes;:	parts;
Está:	This
bailarina.:	ballerina.
movilidad:	mobility
ama:	or
funciones:	functions
usurpa:	usurp
iniciativa:	initiative
quitando:	removing
gravitación:	gravitation
eje:	axis
arabesco:	arabesque
desenredando:	unraveling
enredando:	getting tangled up
vida::	life:
retratos:	portraits
Ayuntamiento.:	City hall.
encamino:	on the way
espectros:	spectra
Escoltado:	Escorted
decían.:	they said.
desaparecen:	disappear
trabajo:	job
obligada:	obligatory
concurrencia:	concurrence
común:	common
práctica:	practice
estrechamente:	tightly
olvidado::	forgotten:
surgir:	to emerge
envuelven:	they wrap
ya—.:	of—.
—completamente:	-completely
públicas:	public
relaciones:	relations
comisionado:	commissioner
sincronización:	synchronization
finalmente:	finally
bailarina:	ballerina
cerámicas:	ceramics
pintor:	painter
municipalidad:	municipality
gobierno:	government
funcionarios:	officials
Facultades;:	Faculties;
Decanos:	Deans
encabezada:	headed
delegación:	delegation
emocionado;:	thrilled;
aeródromo.:	aerodrome.
atardecer:	sunset
rotos:	broken
relámpagos:	lightning
cegado:	blind
hombro.:	shoulder.
prorrumpir:	break out
viste:	showed
tejido:	tissue
ligero:	light
reconozco:	I recognize
flancos;:	flanks;
abrigos:	shelters
creada:	created
escalerilla:	ladder
dejo:	let
señalen:	point out
librar:	librate
adversario:	adversary
repudio.:	repudiation.
acallan:	silence
violencia:	violence
desarman:	disarm
humildad:	modesty
ternura:	tenderness
asistidos:	assisted
amada:	loved
ejercer:	exercise
tiranías::	tyrannies:
combatir:	combat
Siento:	I feel
mí—.:	my-.
deserción:	desertion
brusca:	abrupt
explicaría:	would explain
—gravidez:	-pregnancy
agravarse:	get worse
venido:	come
remordimientos.:	regrets.
plantearé:	I will raise
treinta:	thirty
Cobraré:	I will charge
relato.:	report.
veracidad:	veracity
dar:	but
sucedidos:	successful
indígenas:	indigenous
refiriéndose:	referring
precisan:	they need
suramericano:	south american
escritor:	writer
famosa:	famous
encontraron.:	they found.
«misión»:	"mission"
llegué:	I arrived
hambriento:	hungry
kilómetros:	kilometers
131
:	131
atravesando:	passing through
fugarme:	run away
logré:	I managed
desconfiada:	suspicious
tribmás:	tribmore
viaje::	journey:
patraña:	humbug
venderé:	I will sell
inspiran:	inspire
plantado:	planted
apartado:	apart
«misión:	"mission
hábito:	habit
reportes:	reports
refirieron:	they referred
visitantes:	visitors
equivaldría:	would be equivalent
efecto:	effect
ahora—.:	now-.
—ya:	—of
innumerables:	countless
exclusividad:	exclusiveness
reservarle:	reserve
acepté:	I accepted
meses.:	months.
dominical:	Sunday
rito:	here
rutinario:	routine
acoplado:	coupled
desventura:	misfortune
ultimo:	last
suspenso:	suspended
pulso:	pulse
quedé:	I stayed
emergido:	emerged
inteligible:	intelligible
mentalmente:	mentally
parasitarios:	parasitic
sonidos:	sounds
entrecortada:	choppy
confusa:	confused
despedida:	farewell
tomaría:	would take
permaneciera:	would remain
grité:	I screamed
rogativas:	prayers
incluían:	included
hispánicas:	hispanic
sumamente:	extremely
antesala:	anteroom
traería:	would bring
propósito:	purpose
Aterrado:	Grounded
conmigo.:	with me.
expresiones:	expressions
decirme.:	tell me
entendí:	understood
reía:	laughed
Lloraba:	I cried
teléfono.:	telephone.
hemisferio:	hemisphere
venida:	coming
Kappelmeister:	Bandmaster
Estaba:	Was
embuste.:	scam.
arrumba:	rumba
embustero.:	liar.
aplaudir:	applaud
aplaudirme:	applaud me
disponen:	they have
mías.:	mine
pendientes:	earrings
orbe:	the world
ciernen:	hover
guerras:	wars
capaces:	capable
humanos:	humans
Millones:	Millions
cornadas.:	gored.
toreo:	bullfighting
albur:	dace
riesgos:	risks
elegido:	elected
libremente:	freely
desempeño:	performance
bárbaros:	barbarians
haberse:	have
etnógrafo:	ethnographer
enternece:	internecially
hacinados:	overcrowded
niños:	children
ésos:	those
espectáculo:	show
fríamente:	coldly
soportar:	endure
sobrecoge:	overwhelms
entera.:	whole.
familias:	families
holgada:	baggy
costado:	side
irritado.:	irritated.
avergonzado:	ashamed
enterando:	finding out
evoquen:	evoke
Ana:	Well
Crónica:	Chronicle
Pequeña:	Small
vean:	see
normas:	norms
infringir:	infringe
talento:	talent
regazo:	lap
científica:	scientific
investigación:	investigation
mártir:	martyr
mí::	my:
refieren:	refer
artículos:	articles
persistente:	persistent
temática:	thematic
ejemplar.:	copy.
lectores:	readers
presentarme:	introduce myself
empeña:	pawn
congraciarse:	ingratiate
aviadores:	aviators
premiar:	reward
generosamente:	generously
sobremanera::	exceedingly:
130
:	130
conyugal.:	conjugal.
cuadro:	chart
trazado:	having sex
mimetismo-mágico-rítmico:	magic-rhythmic mimicry
absurda:	absurd
teoría:	theory
á:	on
soldados:	soldiers
uniforme:	uniform
Jesús:	Jesus
regañadientes—:	reluctant—
aceptada:	accepted
incluso:	even
publicadas:	published
Todas:	All
nacional.:	national.
desaparición:	disappearance
siguiente:	following
geográfica:	geographical
inexplorada:	unexplored
hallara:	to cases
exigiera:	demanded
colmo:	full
luego—:	then-
sanguinarias:	bloodthirsty
tribus:	three
cautivos:	captives
sabios:	wise
viajeros:	travelers
figuras:	figures
evocaron:	evoked
inquieto:	restless
realmente:	really
tarde—:	afternoon—
fuere:	was
—quien:	-who
comienzos:	beginnings
mías:	mine
revelando:	revealing
diario:	diary
redacción:	wording
directamente:	directly
saliendo:	leaving
réplica:	replica
sollozar:	sob
Rompió:	Broke
corazonada.:	hunch.
cuentan—:	count—
estando:	standing
mapa:	map
Organográfico:	Organographic
silueta:	silhouette
irguiendo:	erecting
periodistas:	journalists
recortes:	clippings
mostraron:	showed
envidiarme::	envy me:
atracción:	attraction
contrasentido:	contradiction
desarrollarse.:	develop.
tendrán:	they will have
preparando:	preparing
humos:	fumes
novedad:	novelty
esposa.:	wife.
papel::	paper:
interpretar:	interpret
clima.:	climate.
cronologías:	chronologies
escaparon:	they escaped
inmensas:	immense
dilatación:	dilatation
pasmosa:	astonishing
calendarios:	calendars
cálculo:	calculation
opresión:	oppression
angustiosa:	distressing
acerco:	approach
alegran:	they rejoice
Mientras:	While
ventanillas.:	windows.
cristales:	crystals
paseando:	strolling
luminosas:	luminous
geometrías:	geometries
ubicar:	locate
divierten:	have fun
Algunos:	Some
encenderse.:	light.
crepúsculo:	dusk
claridades:	clarities
humo—:	in it—
colosos:	colossi
carcomidos:	eaten away
obeliscos:	obelisks
truncos:	trunks
espesor:	thickness
manso:	meek
atravesar:	cross
Acabamos:	We're done
sueños:	dreams
viviendo.:	living.
SEXTO:	SIXTH
CAPITULO:	CHAPTER
129
:	129
alcanzando.:	reaching.
vamos:	let's go
altitud:	altitude
aturdido:	stunned
duermo:	I sleep
visibilidad:	visibility
volaremos:	we will fly
Avisado:	Warned
aisla:	isolate
niebla:	fog
ascendemos:	we ascend
bonanza:	see them
buitres.:	vultures.
revuelo:	stir
cayó:	fell
Lejos:	Far
viuda.:	widow.
olfato—:	smell—
deleitosamente:	delightfully
—dividida:	—divided
cuelga:	hanging
advertir:	warn
alzar:	raise
camina:	walk
128
:	128
cogollo.:	heart.
sacude:	shake
cayado.:	crook.
molinetes:	pinwheels
vecinos.:	neighbors.
invadida:	invaded
giramos:	we turn
Meseta:	Plateau
rasando:	rage
pasamos:	we passed
abajo;:	below;
quedan:	remain
copas:	glasses
fangoso.:	muddy.
ruedas:	wheels
encajar:	fit
trepidante:	trembling
inmovilidad:	immobility
seguida:	followed
explanada;:	esplanade;
pensar.:	think.
motores:	engines
metálica:	metallic
seña.:	sign.
cabina:	cabin
jubilosa.:	jubilant
prorrumpen:	they break out
avión.:	plane.
arranca:	starts
llamo:	called
acariciado.:	caressed
abrazaban:	they hugged
huyendo:	fleeing
rápido:	fast
zafa:	they died
beso:	kiss
mirarme.:	look at me
rencoroso:	rancorous
llevar»:	carry"
puedes:	can
«Te:	"The
valiosa:	valuable
entrego:	I deliver
despectiva.:	derogatory
encogiéndose:	shrinking
decidir.:	decide.
explico:	I explain
ajena:	alien
imperativo.:	imperative.
nombrando.:	naming.
Adán:	Adam
creación:	creation
mirara:	will look
bastaba:	it was enough
mirara.:	would look
acababa:	ended
liberador.:	liberating.
mensaje:	message
sabía.:	knew.
aplauso—:	applause-
huera:	hula
envanecerme:	get puffed up
Aunque:	Although
torceduras.:	sprains.
curaran:	curan
inventar:	inventory
creyera:	believed
respecto:	regard
curado:	cured
ejucutándola:	ejucutandola
entenderían:	they would understand
destinada:	intended
músicos:	musicians
directores:	directors
correo:	mail
cuidado:	Careful
quedando:	staying
poblado:	populated
producida:	produced
estaría:	would be
evasión.:	evasion.
conocía:	knew
imposibles:	impossible
reclamar:	complain
obstaculizar:	hinder
inutilidad:	futility
comprendiera:	would understand
Aceptaría:	I would accept
malograda.:	ill-fated
allá.:	there.
ataba:	he won't be
rotura:	rip
último:	last
cumplimiento:	compliance
exigía:	demanded
brusca;:	abrupt;
adaptación:	adaptation
Comprendo:	Understand
pedirle:	ask
lealmente:	loyally
explicarle:	explain
comunicado:	statement
enviado:	sent
común.:	common.
requieren:	require
legítimo:	legitimate
gobierna:	governs
adoctrina:	doctrine
Caza:	Hunt
cumplen:	they comply
Todos:	All
demás.:	others.
necesarias:	necessary
iré:	I will go
decisión::	decision:
aluminio.:	aluminum.
cabaña.:	cabin.
noches:	nights
sueño:	dream
turbaban:	they were disturbing
presencias:	presences
librarán:	will free
fibra:	fiber
esteras:	mats
envueltos:	wrapped
127
:	127
funeraria:	mortuary
jarra:	jug
sonajeras:	rattles
deberían:	should
sube:	go up
apremiarme.:	urge me
enérgicamente:	strongly
recompensa:	reward
apetecer:	feel like
colocan.:	place.
Perteneciente:	Belonging
de...:	of...
Cuadernos:	Notebooks
abre:	open
denegación:	denial
hongos.:	fungus.
importa.:	matters.
ocurrir:	occur
demostrar:	demonstrate
altiva:	haughty
míos:	mine
evitan:	they avoid
zozobra:	anxiety
advierte:	warns
disgusto:	disgust
expresa:	express
ausente:	absent
aquí...:	here...
bombonas:	candy
botellas:	bottles
pomos:	snitches
expresadas:	expressed
tinta::	ink:
carecer:	lack
brasa.:	ember
asadas:	roasted
mazorcas:	cobs
roer:	stir
ceniza:	ash
limpiado:	cleaned
simplificación:	simplification
llegando:	arriving
innecesario:	unnecessary
lastre:	plates
aficiones:	hobbies
tiempos::	time:
prescindir:	dispense with
palabras::	words:
resumen:	summary
carezco:	I lack
ánimo.:	cheer up.
vocablos:	words
matriz:	headquarters
desplaza:	move
jorth.:	Jorath.
poema::	poem:
versos:	verses
despierta:	wake up
piloto.:	pilot.
imperioso:	imperious
libros.:	books.
escribir.:	write.
Recomienza:	Restart
acorde:	chord
festiva:	festive
poderosa:	powerful
denegación.:	denial.
arrancar:	start up
meseta:	plateau
suelte:	release
marcharme:	leave
recoja:	pick up
encontrara.:	will find
dondequiera:	wherever
alcanzarme:	reach me
inaplazable:	unavoidable
convocatoria:	call
expresado:	voiced
suceder:	happen
emplea::	uses:
lenguaje:	language
distinto:	distinct
infinito:	infinite
atronador.:	thunderous.
cascadas:	waterfalls
hablarme:	talk to me
ajenos;:	aliens;
Ciertos:	Some
mío.:	mine.
telones:	curtains
frondosos.:	leafy.
hicieron:	they did
espesarse;:	thicken;
precioso:	precious
habitado.:	inhabited.
deshabitado:	unoccupied
ablanda.:	softens
desconcierta:	baffles
ardiente:	burning
líquido:	liquid
miope—.:	short-sighted—.
lentes:	glasses
sanos:	healthy
coincidir:	coincide
aciertan:	they get it right
litografía:	lithography
tiro:	number
movidas:	moved
incómodamente:	uncomfortably
superponemos:	we overlap
estampa;:	print;
ajustarse:	conform
agitarse:	shake
Conservatorio.:	Conservatory.
hurtadillas:	sneaking
fumaba:	I smoked
tabaco:	tobacco
126
:	126
cigarrillos:	cigarettes
renace:	reborn
cigarrillo:	cigarette
hielo.:	ice.
vinagre:	vinegar
marisco:	seafood
apio:	celery
té:	has
apremiantes:	pressing
llamadas:	calls
paladar.:	palate.
disputan:	they dispute
tragan:	swallow
celosa:	jealous
quisiera:	I'd like
olvidadas.:	forgotten.
apetencias:	desires
lúcida:	lucid
embriaguez:	drunkenness
envuelve:	wraps
licor.:	liqueur.
sorbo:	sip
probado:	tried
beber.:	to drink.
desenrosca:	unscrew
aparta:	separate
capuchino.:	cappuccino.
vendas:	sales
cuchillos:	knives
conservas:	preserves
medicamentos:	medicines
entregan:	deliver
aterrizaje:	landing
imposible:	impossible
habérseme:	have me
paracaídas:	parachute
impermeables:	waterproof
bulto:	bulk
sacan:	they take out
Romanticismo.:	Romance.
Conquista:	Conquest
Medievo:	Medieval
presente—:	present—
identifican:	identify
regresándose:	returning
ochenta:	eighty
pueden:	they can
cifra:	cipher
Génesis:	Genesis
siglos:	ages
recta.:	straight.
línea:	line
fraguas:	forges
buscaban.:	they were looking for
agitar:	shake
pensaron:	they thought
huella:	fingerprint
suelos:	floors
otear:	otter
viviendas:	housing
aglomeración:	agglomeration
divisar:	spot
asombraron:	they amazed
turbonada.:	turbo nada.
esquivar:	dodge
apartarse:	depart
tuvieron:	they had
abandonar:	abandon
buscar.:	look for.
dispersión:	dispersion
informes:	information
orientados:	oriented
rescate.:	rescue.
cuantioso:	large
reactualizando:	updating
publicados:	published
relatos:	reports
torturado.:	tortured.
hipótesis:	hypothesis
insidiosa:	insidious
creado:	created
sanguinarios.:	bloodthirsty
quién—:	who-
saben:	per
buscando.:	searching.
aviones:	airplanes
nombre.:	name.
aparato::	device:
impulso.:	impulse.
restaba:	remained
frena:	brake
oportuno:	timely
viraje:	turn
peligroso:	dangerous
suelo;:	floor;
bajo.:	low.
vacilando:	hesitating
desciende:	descends
despejar:	clear
cayado:	crook
apartarlos:	separate them
alborotando:	rioting
saltando:	jumping
temor:	fear
acuden:	they come
contagioso:	contagious
regocijo:	joy
agitando:	waving
explanada:	esplanade
señal.:	sign.
esperando:	waiting
Advierto:	I warn
titubeo:	hesitation
patas:	paws
paralelamente:	in parallel
hélice:	propeller
removido:	removed
explosión;:	burst;
un.:	and.
125
:	125
aferrada:	clinging
desafiante:	challenging
Indios:	Indians
Capitán:	Captain
volante:	steering wheel
máquina:	machine
separan:	separate
nuevamente;:	again;
romperse:	break
prestas:	lend
gente.:	people.
«cosa:	"What
pasmados:	stunned
miran:	another
seguido:	followed
Gobierno:	Government
Neolítico.:	Neolithic.
aterrorizados:	terrified
huyen:	Huyen
gira:	tour
Bajo:	Low
volteo.:	I turn.
precipitación:	precipitation
acunado:	cradled
encima.:	on.
entra:	enter
percutiente:	striking
fusil.:	gun.
llevaba:	wore
noche.:	evening.
arreció:	escalated
mojada.:	wet
terminó:	term
derritiendo.:	melting.
cerosa:	waxy
escurría:	drained
pedazos:	pieces
desintegraba:	disintegrated
encarnada:	red
humano.:	human.
contorno:	contour
perdiendo:	losing
emborronando:	blurring
desdibujando:	blurring
seguía:	continued
mirar::	look:
forcé:	strength
estampido:	stamped
rebotando:	bouncing
confundieron:	confused
disparos:	shots
Sonaron:	They sounded
derecho.:	right.
perdigones:	shot
izquierdo:	left
cañón:	canon
habías:	had
atreven:	dare
arrancó:	started
colérico:	choleric
Ejecutor.:	Executor.
iniciaría:	would start
deslindes:	demarcations
levantan:	they lift
siempre.:	always.
cambiar:	change
gatillo:	trigger
apretara:	will squeeze
resistía:	resisted
rapiña.:	rapine.
anulado:	annulled
suprimido:	deleted
contaminándola:	contaminating it
destrozado:	destroyed
indignante:	outrageous
inmundo;:	unclean;
hombre.:	man.
Apagar:	To switch off
apagarlos.:	turn them off.
dependía:	it depended
mirando.:	looking.
seguían:	they followed
párpados:	eyelids
ahí::	there:
apuntar.:	aim.
Volví:	I returned
cura:	treatment
—apremió—.:	-pressure-.
«Dispara:	«Shoot
volví:	I returned
morir.:	to die
confesión:	confession
pedía:	asked
Bajé:	I went down
onjejión».:	objection".
onjejión...:	objection...
«onjejión...:	"objection...
como::	as:
ininteligible:	unintelligible
gatillo.:	trigger.
decidía:	decided
agujero:	hole
puse:	side
Levanté:	Levant
«Apunta:	«Aim
horribles:	horrible
mirándonos:	looking at us
detuvo::	stopped:
rastreador:	tracker
Avanzamos:	We move forward
llovida.:	rained
maleza:	evil
trillo:	trill
concertábamos:	we arranged
leproso.:	leper.
estábamos:	we were
oscurecer:	darken
Anduvimos:	We walked
huellas.:	footprints.
encorvado:	curved
hondamente:	deeply
pasas:	passes
Unos:	Some
sucias:	dirty
holladas:	trampled
violación:	rape
Llegamos:	we arrived
manatí.:	manatee.
hinchado:	swollen
124
:	124
arrastraban:	they dragged
fangosas:	muddy
turbulentas:	turbulent
echamos:	we cast
paños:	cloths
Envolvimos:	We get involved
seguirlo.:	follow him.
índice:	index
Poniendo:	putting
técnicas:	techniques
perdurar:	endure
armeros:	gunsmiths
troquel:	die
cañones:	cannons
larguísimos:	very long
fusiles:	rifles
brazo::	arm:
deslizó:	slipped
puños:	cuffs
apretaba:	squeezed
agresiva.:	aggressive
varón:	male
consentida:	consented
repugnante:	disgusting
culpables:	guilty
fuésemos:	we were
indecible::	unspeakable:
indignación:	indignation
sublimado.:	sublimate.
ungüento:	ointment
frota:	fleet
entrepiernas:	of the enterprises
telarañas:	cobwebs
tapón:	plug
selváticos:	jungle
latente.:	latent.
reproche:	reproach
encerrara:	closed
recuerda:	remember
aquí»:	here"
alrededores.:	surroundings.
batida:	beat
garrotes:	clubs
armados:	armed
hilachas:	threads
hemorragia:	hemorrhage
restañando:	stagnating
desgarrándole:	tearing him
violarla:	rape her
supo:	knew
aclaración:	clarification
lograron:	they managed
horrorizado:	horrified
llanto:	crying
rodillas.:	knees.
ensangrentada:	bloody
regresado:	returned
atroz::	atrocious:
aguacero.:	downpour.
echa:	cast
arropada:	clothed
Capitán.:	Captain.
caserío:	hamlet
sucedido:	happened
inglés:	English
corno:	horn
trompa:	trunk
detenido:	arrested
imaginaciones:	imaginations
sorprendo:	I surprise
dedos...:	fingers...
ensalivarse:	ensalivate
antebrazo:	forearm
doblar:	fold
sopesarlo:	weigh it
Puse:	Party
oído.:	ear.
mujeres»:	women"
empreñadas:	engaged
«En:	"In
llovía:	it was raining
rodeaba:	surrounded
cobrar:	charge
volvimos:	we came back
deleite:	treat
abrazo.:	hug.
calores:	heats
adueñó:	took over
oyó:	heard
respiro:	breath
techumbres:	roofing
tregua:	truce
Hubo:	Was
terminado.:	finished.
creímos:	we believed
verdor:	greenery
espárrago:	asparagus
pureza:	Preza
nacen:	are born
estiércol:	manure
serosidades:	serosities
nacera:	had been born
orina:	urine
órganos:	organs
excreción:	excretion
vecindad:	neighborhood
engendrará:	will engender
engendrarse:	beget
maceración:	maceration
podre:	rotten
Llegaron:	They arrived
amenas.:	pleasant.
menester:	need
venenosa.:	poisonous.
culebra:	snake
garfios:	hooks
fundido:	cast
derecha:	right
blandido:	brandished
cortarse:	cut
enormemente.:	enormously.
aburriéndose:	getting bored
tejiendo:	knitting
necesaria:	necessary
pasan:	pass
anegada:	flooded
rastreado:	tracked
desaparecieron:	they disappeared
chinches:	bed bugs
123
:	123
caída:	drop
levantar:	lift
lluvia.:	rain.
comarca:	district
gigantesca:	gigantic
cumpliendo:	fulfilling
estuvieran:	were
cauce:	channel
arruga:	wrinkle
pliegue:	fold
negras.:	black.
coladas:	glued
filtraciones:	leaks
farallones:	cliffs
Sobre:	On
podrida.:	rotten
criaturas:	creatures
numerosas:	numerous
sapos:	frogs
cantaron:	sing
musgos:	mosses
treparon:	they climbed
multiplicaron:	multiplied
malangas;:	oily;
regocija;:	rejoices;
traidoras.:	traitors
cieno:	silt
llenos:	full
hoyos:	holes
hundiéndome:	sinking
lodo:	official
rodado:	wheeled
salidas:	Departures
encuentran:	find
huele:	smells
fango.:	mud.
cascada:	waterfall
empellón:	shove
quebradas:	ravines
rotas:	routes
arrancadas:	sprints
diques:	discs
ahogados.:	drowned
escombros:	debris
podridas:	rotten
balsas:	the voice
acarreando:	carrying
sucios:	dirty
suelo.:	floor.
colores:	colors
cantar:	sing
necesitada:	needy
mantiene:	maintains
blancas:	white
difuminado:	blurred
demasiado.:	too much.
Llueve:	It's raining
interminables.:	endless
escuece:	stings
negativa:	negative
matrimonio:	marriage
mentar:	ment
primeros.:	first.
guiones:	scripts
enmendando:	amending
papel—:	paper-
consumo:	consumption
decir::	say:
comienzo:	beginning
imaginativa:	imagination
maravillosa:	wonderful
temo:	theme
Casi:	Almost
están.:	are.
esbozos:	sketches
quedarán:	fall
llenadas:	filled
sesenta:	sixty
oportunas:	timely
siembras:	sowing
procederse:	proceed
dañado:	damaged
reparar:	fix
edificación:	building
pasarse:	go
quiera.:	want.
libretas:	notebooks
traerá:	will bring
propone:	proposes
último.:	last.
advirtiéndome:	warning me
cuaderno:	notebook
compadecido:	pitied
rincón:	corner
cuero:	leather
volvería.:	I would go back.
mulata:	mulatto
casara:	married
Mulato:	Mulatto
cantar::	sing:
melodía:	melody
carabelas—:	caravels—
bordo:	edge
sonó:	rang
guitarra:	guitar
compartir:	share
invito:	invitation
Horrorizado:	Horrified
sanciones.:	sanctions.
mayores:	older
hubo:	was
atrevía:	dared
población.:	population.
venir:	come
prohibido:	forbidden
olvidado.:	forgotten.
Odisea:	Odyssey
jornada:	day
Autana:	Autoana
aldea:	village
efectivamente:	indeed
Signo:	Sign
Edad:	Age
fundación:	foundation
permanecer:	remain
incapaz:	unable
Penélope.:	Penelope.
seguro:	insurance
diamantes:	diamonds
él.:	he.
inmenso:	immense
buscadores:	search engines
encontró:	found
cuarzos:	quartz
vacío:	empty
llevo:	he took
tiempos:	time
perros:	dogs
contento:	happy
interesa:	interest
pasajes:	tickets
estos:	these
abril:	April
bajado:	lowered
cuenta:	account
creyendo:	believing
remos:	oars
ocurrido:	occurred
botador:	bouncer
señala:	points out
bogar:	arcs
impaciencia.:	impatience.
dibujo:	drawing
quebrado:	broken
más.:	further.
corteza:	crust
incisión:	incision
altura:	height
continente:	continent
primero:	first
respondiendo:	responding
bulle:	bulls
amarillas:	yellow
terminaron:	they finished
empuje:	push
disponer:	provide
trascendencia:	transcendence
cuestión:	question
fríos:	cold
impaciente:	impatient
ansioso:	anxious
finjo:	I pretend
destinado:	intended
hemos:	we have
ayuda:	aid
griegos.:	Greeks.
lugares:	places
verdadero:	TRUE
llamado:	called
sabe:	he knows
sorpresa:	surprise
días.:	days.
dicen:	they say
comenta:	comment
estuve:	I have been
siente:	feel
Conquistadores:	Pathfinders
dueño:	owner
lleva:	carry
orilla:	bank
quiera:	want
libertad:	freedom
tarda:	afternoon
cabecera:	head
navegar:	browse
hijas:	daughters
ésta:	this
tienda:	store
papeles:	papers
siguen:	they continue
cubierto:	covered
traspasado:	transferred
otras:	others
imaginar:	imagine
desollado:	desolate
hayan:	have
tomé:	Thomas
Hasta:	Until
preguntas:	questions
matadores:	matadors
mutilado:	mutilated
recientemente:	recently
bravios:	brave
fuerte:	strong
Hidra:	Hydra
—en:	-in
tercera:	third
Navio:	Ship
agorero:	doomsayer
escrito:	written
hallé:	I found
pinturas:	paintings
salón:	salon
bastante:	quite
suficiente:	enough
hubiese:	would have
empeño:	endeavor
aturdirse:	stun
rápidamente:	quickly
enojado:	angry
Padrenuestro:	Our Father
enfermedades:	diseases
casos:	cases
espíritu:	spirit
subirse:	get on
blandura:	softness
sobresalta:	startles
abrir:	open
piel:	fur
riendo:	laughing
últimas:	latest
recuerdan:	remember
convergencia:	convergence
viajes:	trips
tratando:	treating
enteros:	whole
extremos:	extremes
Aún:	Still
colillas:	butts
estaré:	I will be
importancia:	importance
cien:	hundred
grasas:	fats
huelen:	take
albergue:	hostel
hastiado:	jaded
abro:	I open
Así:	So
terreno.:	land.
quedó:	remained
cuentas:	accounts
indefinidamente:	indefinitely
alarga:	lengthens
perder:	lose
menor:	smaller
querido:	darling
abogado:	lawyer
corazón:	heart
figura.:	figure.
revista:	magazine
mío:	mine
armado:	armed
Sólo:	Only
podido:	could
vasto:	vast
Porvenir.:	Future.
Recuerdos:	Memories
taberna:	bar
semejantes:	similar
corren:	they run
letras:	lyrics
esperar:	wait
Apocalipsis:	Apocalypse
fechas:	dates
grandeza:	greatness
transcurrido:	elapsed
ámbito:	scope
función:	function
nuevas:	new
ritmos:	rhythms
abuso:	abuse
ennoblecidos:	ennobled
gentes:	people
tristeza:	sadness
estrechez:	narrowness
meros:	heritage
oscuridad:	darkness
consiste:	consists
cabezas:	heads
pintado:	painted
quieren:	they want
enseña:	teaches
Venusberg:	Venus mountain
precisamente:	precisely
danzas:	dances
vivirlo:	live it
cemento:	cement
órdenes:	orders
siglo:	century
vivienda.:	dwelling.
jefe:	boss
templo:	temple
pública:	public
vivienda:	dwelling
cambio:	change
reflejo:	reflection
automatismo:	automatism
olvidado:	forgotten
guirnaldas:	garlands
haba:	length
escucha:	listen
presentes:	gifts
añade:	duck
texto:	text
penumbras:	shadows
frío:	cold
descansan:	they rest
ancianos:	seniors
subterráneo:	underground
multitud:	crew
fija:	fixed
andan:	from the moment
ancha:	much
cruzan:	cross
asombro:	astonishment
respiración:	breathing
leves:	light
llorar:	cry
plantada:	planted
vivía:	lived
tenerme:	have me
yeso:	and so
enojo:	anger
comprender:	grasp
decoración:	decoration
alcanzar:	reach
tratar:	treat
inútil:	useless
remoto:	remote
abierta:	open
habría:	there would be
indulgencia:	indulgence
fácil:	easy
escucharme:	listen to me
puso:	heart
tránsito:	transit
engañados:	deceived
perenne:	perennial
encontrado:	found
encuentros:	meetings
precisa:	it needs
día.:	day.
separación:	separation
golpe:	blow
Comprendí:	I understood
Sus:	Their
inmovilizada:	immobilized
máscaras:	masks
hecha:	made
situado:	situated
empeñado:	pawned
vasta:	only
paludismo:	malaria
afirmando:	stating
nociones:	notions
presenta:	presents
trata:	treats
hábil:	skillful
primitivos:	primitives
lectura:	reading
recoger:	collect
biblioteca:	library
Entre:	Between
deseos:	wishes
vuelvo:	I'm back
aquí.:	here.
ajeno:	unaffiliated
brazo:	arm
descender:	descend
crueles:	cruel
recursos:	resources
espera.:	wait.
distancias:	distances
afirma:	states
da:	and
hallando:	finding
acto:	act
inacabable:	unending
galería:	gallery
arañas:	spiders
observo:	noticed
recepción:	reception
sonido:	sound
conviven:	coexist
venidos:	come
borracho:	drunk
presidente:	president
estudio:	study
espejos:	mirrors
sollozos:	sobs
senos:	old
abiertos:	open
intimidad:	privacy
inesperada:	unexpected
acude:	come
acepta:	accept
peor:	worse
suelen:	they usually
gravidez:	pregnancy
antiguos:	ancient
leyendas:	legends
nombres:	names
centenares:	hundreds
curiosidad:	curiosity
misiones:	missions
misión:	mission
hallaron:	they found
Mesetas.:	Plateaus.
peores:	worst
maravilloso:	marvelous
revelar:	reveal
vender:	sell
cuartillas:	quarters
Ese:	That
posibilidades:	possibilities
preguntándome:	wondering
repasando:	reviewing
oír:	hear
creí:	I believed
evasión:	evasion
reunirse:	meet up
tomar:	take
abandonado:	abandoned
tanta:	so much
llegó:	arrive
pista:	track
cautivo:	captive
explorador:	explorer
sufre:	suffer
estamos:	we are
cuales:	which
asegurar:	ensure
país:	country
sacarme:	take me out
apacible:	gentle
excusa:	excuse
conyugal;:	conjugal;
virtud:	virtue
familia:	family
hogar:	home
irrita:	irritates
plácido:	placid
hermoso:	beautiful
elogios:	compliments
explicó:	explained
comunión:	communion
pasaron:	bird
fotografías:	photographs
víspera:	eve
ignorada:	ignored
actualidad:	present
figura:	figure
patética:	pathetic
zona:	area
señalado:	indicated
pidió:	asked
exploradores:	explorers
verla:	see it
tenían:	they had
tuvo:	had
apartamento:	apartment
dramática:	dramatic
rodeada:	surrounded
publicaciones:	publications
fui:	I went
rodea:	surrounds
Para:	To
creía:	believed
suburbios:	suburbs
tremenda:	tremendous
seis:	six
vivido:	vivid
uso:	use
índices:	indexes
empiezan:	they start
arcos:	bows
nacer:	be born
nube:	cloud
vuelve:	comes back
lados:	sides
conduce:	lead
jarras:	jugs
Veo:	I see
mando:	command
hablo:	speak
acento:	accent
hombro:	shoulder
cosa:	What
callarme:	shut up
sabido:	known
formas:	shapes
vanidad:	vanity
toda:	all
sentía:	felt
amigos:	friends
bajar:	lower
tocara:	will touch
llevaría:	would take
culpas:	blame
víctima:	victim
vínculo:	bond
deber:	duty
situación:	situation
haberme:	have me
regresaré:	I will return
Dentro:	Within
oficios:	crafts
Adelantado.:	Advanced.
cazador:	hunter
conocen:	they know
plena:	full
llevar:	carry
repente:	suddenly
bastón:	cane
llevando:	carrying
ofrecida:	offered
ellas:	they
recibir:	receive
maleta:	suitcase
eso:	that
indudable:	doubtless
dolor.:	pain.
angustia:	distress
cuadernos:	notebooks
hechos:	facts
tinta:	ink
expresar:	express
suprema:	supreme
marchar:	leave
ponen:	they put
Apenas:	Just
hará:	will do
libro:	book
Treno.:	Train.
orquesta:	orchestra
sonoridad:	sonority
aguarda:	wait
amenaza:	threat
acontecimiento:	event
oigo:	I hear
hacerse:	become
sendero:	path
planos:	plans
elementos:	elements
cierran:	they close
montañas:	mountains
Este:	It is
amarillo:	yellow
sabores:	flavors
entrañas:	bowels
aluminio:	aluminum
cantimplora:	canteen
telas:	screens
fuese:	was
época:	era
cruzarse:	cross
Henoch:	Enoch
admiro:	admire
verme:	don't give
esperaba:	I expected
Mesetas:	Plateaus
musicales:	musicals
área:	area
pilotos:	pilots
premio:	award
ofrecido:	offered
incluye:	includes
prisionero:	prisoner
Alguien:	Someone
estupor:	stupor
llaman:	they call
rodar:	rotate
contacto:	contact
aleja:	move away
invención:	invention
redondez:	roundness
repite:	repeat
años.:	years.
pesado:	heavy
aullan:	howl
salido:	left
regresa:	come back
hamaca:	hammock
trueno:	thunder
prisa:	hurry
pecho:	chest
ecos:	echoes
volaban:	they flew
seguidos:	followed
carga:	load
hiciera:	did
cipos:	cipes
muros:	walls
hacerlo:	do it
Aquello:	That
Dos:	Of the
salía:	went out
presión:	pressure
hundía:	sank
ojos.:	eyes.
arrodillado:	kneeling
recién:	newly
Petroglifos:	Petroglyphs
seguir:	follow
marcaban:	they marked
cadáver:	corpse
seña:	sign
llamar:	call
actitud:	attitude
igualmente:	also
atropello:	run over
causa:	cause
experiencia:	experience
capuchino:	cappuccino
dije:	said
emprende:	undertake
sexo:	sex
ocurre:	occurs
Algo:	Something
umbral:	threshold
brotado:	sprouted
acariciar:	stroke
ansias:	craving
propiciatorio.:	propitiatory.
buscamos:	we seek
cosas.:	things.
espacio:	space
bruma:	Hoar
dejaron:	they left
generación:	generation
confundidos:	confused
muertas:	dead
fomento:	promotion
juego:	game
reglas:	rules
padecer:	suffer
metidos:	stuck up
Gavilán:	Hawk
desaforada:	unbridled
fuga:	leak
torrente.:	torrent.
Cada:	Each
pintan:	they paint
mesetas:	plateaus
hongos:	fungus
cubiertos:	covered
raíces:	roots
sombras:	shadows
naturaleza:	nature
agobio:	burden
aparece:	appears
ausencia:	absence
aligerando:	lightening
acrece:	increases
lápiz:	pencil
usando:	using
excitación:	excitement
vuelva:	come back
pequeñas:	small
trabajando:	working
Sigo:	I continue
acabar:	end
habrán:	there will be
ir:	and
terminen:	the semester
venado:	deer
cortezas:	crusts
trataba:	tried
—la:	-the
leproso:	leper
necesita:	needs
tronco:	stem
sigue:	go on
pregunto:	asked
marca:	mark
navegación:	navigation
comprendo:	understand
calor:	heat
compañero:	buddy
caño:	spout
perfil:	profile
yacimiento:	deposit
forma:	shape
explica:	explains
diciembre):	December)
atrás:	back
composición:	composition
Cabellera:	Hair
mirar:	look
pudo:	could
atrás.:	back.
griegos:	greeks
andando:	going
descansar:	rest
destinadas:	intended
signo:	sign
busco:	I'm looking for
única:	unique
hacerme:	make me
nombre:	name
avellanado:	countersunk
eran:	were
celo:	even
piernas:	legs
parecen:	they seem
dibujado:	drawn
Alzo:	I get up
espejo:	mirror
hablar:	talk
caras:	guys
bóvedas:	vaults
existe:	exists
lentamente:	slowly
colectivo:	collective
porque:	why
Si:	And
propio:	own
alivio:	relief
recordar:	remember
caer:	fall
daba:	after
veía:	saw
caído:	fallen
debilidad:	weakness
nuevos:	new
buen:	good
podría:	could
habían:	had
silencio:	silence
aspecto:	aspect
nuestras:	our
pesar:	weigh
autor:	author
Su:	They are
viaje.:	journey.
periodista:	journalist
gestos:	gestures
creciente:	growing
Parece:	It seems
quedado:	left
segunda:	second
conyugal:	conjugal
columnas:	columns
demás:	others
dejar:	leave
rostros:	faces
aturdimiento:	daze
empresa:	enterprise
abraza:	hug
perdón:	sorry
pide:	ask
habré:	there will be
Tengo:	Have
público:	public
rumbo:	course
mentiras:	lies
suma:	addition
conversación:	conversation
difícil:	difficult
terreno:	land
velado:	veiled
habíamos:	we had
ignoran:	they ignore
olvidar:	forget
seres:	beings
absurdo:	absurd
existencia:	existence
hallarse:	be
torna:	returns
prosa:	prose
personaje:	character
interés:	interest
emoción:	emotion
iniciar:	start
escena:	scene
vitrinas:	showcases
Treno:	Train
volando:	flying
dejé:	I left
tantas:	so many
luces:	lights
empezar:	begin
llamáis:	you call
acuesto:	I lie down
cabellera:	hair
extremo:	extreme
estrépito:	crash
cierra:	close
volver:	return
apuntes:	notes
hombros:	shoulders
verdadera:	true
joven:	young
capaz:	able
divorcio.:	divorce.
esfuerzo:	effort
destino.:	destination.
vocación:	vocation
pocas:	few
Curador.:	Curator.
expresión:	expression
tinta.:	ink.
admito:	I admit
confusión:	confusion
—el:	-he
espaldas:	backs
trabajar:	work
falta:	lack
Hago:	Do
demora:	delay
ruido:	noise
vuelven:	they come back
siento:	I feel
planchas:	irons
adolescencia:	adolescence
impaciencia:	impatience
beber:	to drink
llena:	full
raudales:	rapids
tempestad:	storm
arrojado:	thrown
acá:	here
minutos:	minutes
transcurre:	passes
capítulo:	chapter
cuarto:	room
Grandes:	Big
rumbos:	directions
partida:	match
vuelo:	flight
historia:	history
novela:	novel
decirme:	tell me
semana:	week
cerrada:	closed
centro:	center
ello:	it
techo:	ceiling
acaso:	chance
peligro:	danger
ambos:	both
adelante:	forward
estuviera:	was
existencia.:	existence.
esto.:	this.
Más:	Further
así:	So
garganta:	throat
dedo:	finger
nivel:	level
claro:	Of course
señaló:	pointed out
empezó:	started
estaban:	were
mozo:	guy
labios:	lips
primeras:	first
lejanías:	distances
marcado:	marked
posesión:	possession
intento:	tried
remedios:	remedies
rebozo:	shawl
grita:	scream
diálogo:	dialogue
habrá:	there will be
tengo:	I have
salidos:	exited
nuestros:	our
fría:	cold
espesa:	thick
Esto:	This
izquierda:	left
admitir:	admit
dando:	giving
tierras:	land
mejor:	better
espesas:	thick
rodillas:	knees
poder:	can
entero:	whole
árbol:	tree
poner:	put
mediodía:	average
vuelto:	turned
además:	besides
humedad:	humidity
choza:	hut
alfombra:	rug
conmigo:	with me
hijo:	son
acercarse:	approach
corriente:	current
sentir:	to feel
encuentra:	finds
muerte:	death
cierta:	true
hallada:	found
sensación:	sensation
pasos:	steps
espera:	wait
meses:	months
mismas:	themselves
perdido:	lost
últimos:	last
cubierta:	deck
qué:	that
perro:	dog
Como:	As
Luego:	Then
cierto:	TRUE
habitación:	room
hora:	time
orden:	order
ciertas:	certain
secreto:	secret
cuerpos:	bodies
deben:	they must
siete:	seven
Esta:	This
conocido:	acquaintance
significado:	meaning
alguien:	someone
único:	single
ahí:	there
dinero:	money
tenido:	had
leyes:	laws
quería:	wanted to
Porque:	Why
varias:	several
arte:	until
tras:	after
aquella:	that
noticias:	news
mirando:	looking
través:	through
morir:	to die
licor:	liqueur
última:	last
cabeza:	head
acabo:	just
quedaba:	remained
pensando:	thinking
sí:	Yeah
llega:	arrives
quiere:	wants
mirada:	look
libros:	books
medios:	media
objetos:	objects
esas:	those
acaba:	ends
prensa:	press
extraviado:	lost
dicho:	saying
nosotros:	us
buscando:	searching
ciento:	hundred
pasa:	happens
rostro:	face
debía:	should
abierto:	open
parecía:	it seemed
atención:	attention
fusil:	gun
fraile:	friar
tratado:	treated
dijo:	said
salen:	the hall
conciencia:	awareness
cual:	which
movimiento:	motion
dolor:	pain
paisaje:	landscape
encontrar:	find
abajo:	below
crece:	grows
suena:	sounds
Todo:	All
envuelto:	wrapped
animales:	animals
ríos:	rivers
tiempo.:	time.
será:	it will be
aunque:	although
escribir:	write
empieza:	begin
cuerdas:	ropes
cuatro:	four
botella:	bottle
Además:	Besides
objeto:	object
fondo:	bottom
griego:	Greek
primeros:	first
punto:	point
muchos:	many
Estoy:	I'm
puesto:	position
mía:	tight
iba:	others
ruinas:	ruins
rescate:	rescue
jamás:	never
vivir:	live
mí.:	my.
brazos:	arms
después:	after
prueba:	proof
sería:	I would be
divorcio:	divorce
tener:	have
puedo:	I can
mente:	mind
deseo:	desire
propia:	own
olor:	smell
aguardiente:	schnapps
Desde:	From
ciudades:	cities
algunos:	some
año:	year
pasar:	market
Curador:	Curator
Un:	And
estoy:	I'm
varios:	several
cincuenta:	fifty
súbito:	sudden
segundo:	second
fuerza:	force
aquello:	that
palabra:	word
hacer:	do
andar:	to walk
hizo:	those
salir:	go out
cómo:	as
hubieran:	they would have
según:	according to
mujeres:	women
tarea:	task
grandes:	big
nunca:	never
yerbas:	herbs
busca:	search
todo.:	all.
estado:	state
nubes:	clouds
hojas:	leaves
haya:	these
partir:	leave
lluvias:	rains
lluvia:	rain
pueda:	can
enana:	dwarf
algún:	some
les:	THE
visto:	view
canoa:	canoe
cualquier:	any
cerca:	fence
apenas:	just
noticia:	news
gente:	people
llegar:	arrive
cuya:	whose
música:	music
obra:	work
caminos:	roads
digo:	I say
debe:	has to
llegado:	arrived
tantos:	so many
idioma:	language
recuerdo:	memory
necesidad:	need
viene:	he comes
ellos:	they
aquel:	that
hallado:	found
piloto:	pilot
menos:	less
suelo:	floor
instante:	instant
dejado:	left
semblante:	countenance
allí:	over there
uno:	a
torno:	lathe
lejos:	far
Una:	A
—como:	-as
pájaros:	birds
debajo:	below
unas:	nails
arriba:	above
decir:	say
haciendo:	doing
mucho:	a lot
semanas:	weeks
entonces:	so
correr:	run
entrada:	Prohibited
lado:	side
presencia:	presence
veo:	I see
acerca:	about
hacía:	toward
regreso:	return
realidad:	reality
cuyas:	whose
detrás:	behind
encuentro:	meeting
hallar:	cases
quienes:	who
pasado:	past
pensar:	think
nuevamente:	again
habla:	speaks
dentro:	within
cuyo:	whose
oficio:	job
casi:	almost
vientre:	belly
muchas:	many
parte:	part
troncos:	trunks
verdad:	TRUE
necesario:	necessary
dado:	given
ritmo:	rhythm
demasiado:	too much
sentido:	sense
ciertos:	some
viaje:	journey
Venados:	Deer
otros:	others
él:	he
instrumentos:	instruments
cuyos:	whose
periódico:	newspaper
caso:	case
tienen:	have
medio:	half
Ya:	Of
esos:	those
responde:	respond
momento:	moment
años:	years
fueron:	were
están:	are
hacen:	do
tarde:	afternoon
sabiendo:	knowing
aún:	still
nuestra:	our
señal:	sign
han:	he
frente:	forehead
bien:	GOOD
teatro:	theater
junto:	together
Mónica:	Monica
todavía:	still
estar:	be
quiero:	wanna
también:	also
mañana:	tomorrow
modo:	way
tenía:	had
mientras:	while
primera:	first
estas:	is
horas:	hours
Anunciación:	Annunciation
misma:	same
cuanto:	how much
mundo:	world
fuera:	out
día:	day
presente:	gift
suerte:	luck
Por:	By
mano:	thousand
tal:	of
buscar:	look for
regresar:	go back
Simón:	Simon
veces:	times
esposa:	wife
parece:	it seems
árboles:	trees
avión:	plane
poco:	bit
gesto:	gesture
mujer:	women
puede:	can
Le:	The
sólo:	only
hubiera:	had
palabras:	words
alguna:	some
indios:	indians
ni:	in
unos:	some
otro:	other
tanto:	both
muy:	very
voz:	voice
Ahora:	Now
nada:	nothing
lugar:	place
cada:	each
cosas:	things
esta:	this
pues:	well
Mouche:	Fly
cuerpo:	body
siempre:	always
esto:	this
De:	Of
otra:	other
sido:	been
antes:	before
todas:	all
Adelantado:	Advanced
durante:	during
allá:	there
todos:	all
noche:	evening
vida:	life
tres:	three
mismo:	same
desde:	from
hecho:	made
hombre:	man
ese:	that
entre:	between
hombres:	men
hasta:	until
Cuando:	When
papel:	paper
fue:	was
pero:	but
tiene:	has
quien:	who
estaba:	was
este:	it is
La:	The
miedo:	fear
días:	days
está:	this
ojos:	eyes
luego:	then
dos:	of the
le:	the
hacia:	toward
bajo:	low
aquí:	here
En:	In
si:	and
tiempo:	time
algo:	something
ser:	to be
hace:	does
ya:	of
mí:	my
El:	He
todo:	all
Pero:	But
ahora:	now
vez:	time
cuando:	when
había:	there was
donde:	where
sus:	their
sobre:	on
más:	further
como:	as
para:	to
su:	are
por:	by
un:	and
se:	with
una:	a
del:	of the
en:	in
el:	he
la:	the
que:	what
de:	of
