151
:	151
Jenofonte.:	Xenophon.
Anábasis:	Anabasis
admiraba:	admired
solamente:	only
apuntar:	aim
faltó:	short
siquiera.:	even.
modificado:	modified
viajaba:	was traveling
preciosas.:	precious.
alientan:	encourage
Responden:	Respondent
viajero:	traveler
Hechicero.:	Sorcerer.
venezolano—:	Venezuelan-
archivos:	files
fonográficamente:	phonographically
grabó:	recorded
shirishanas:	srishanas
descritos:	described
Autana.:	Autoana.
piaroa:	pair
fisonomía:	physiognomy
descubrieron:	discovered
franceses:	French
famosos:	famous
geográfica—:	geographic—
ubicación:	location
—aún:	-still
poblaciones:	populations
tumultuoso:	tumultuous
Brasil:	Brazil
viniéndose:	coming
incipiente:	incipient
acceder:	access
Uarirén:	The Uariren
Capítulos:	Chapters
Sabana:	Sheet
trocado:	exchanged
gótica.:	gothic.
Muerto.:	Dead.
Raudal:	Torrent
paraje:	place
oculta.:	hidden
exactamente:	exactly
descrito:	described
fotografiados:	photographed
precisas:	accurate
visiones:	visions
ciñe:	cinema
integran:	integrate
prototipos:	prototypes
provincianas;:	provincial;
latinoamericana:	latin american
ubicación::	location:
NOTA:	USE
150
:	150
enero:	January
Corteza:	Crust
aclara:	clarify
escamado:	flaky
próximas:	nearby
mueren:	they die
dulces:	sweets
algas:	started
rocosos:	rocky
erizan:	bristle
sumergidas:	submerged
Reaparecen:	They reappear
notablemente:	notably
descendido:	descended
Sísifo.:	Sisyphus.
vacaciones:	vacation
aguarda.:	wait.
Cómitre:	Committee
privado:	private
ensordecido:	deafened
seré:	I will be
Falta:	Lack
—oficio:	-job
sitúa:	situates
tangibles:	tangible
representado:	represented
adelantarse:	get ahead
desligarse:	disengage
impedida:	prevented
difíciles.:	difficult.
amores:	loves
Romanticismo:	Romance
umbrosas:	shady
mansiones:	mansions
transcurre.:	passes.
época.:	era.
mienten:	they lie
ignorarse:	ignore
ardidos:	burning
Navegaré:	I will sail
Manatí.:	Manatee.
pasaje:	passage
fui.:	I went.
trunco—:	trunk
torcido:	crooked
enderezar:	straighten
neumas.:	I don't know.
ordenación:	ordering
lista:	list
contrapuntista:	contrapuntist
exigua:	little
realidades:	realities
Inventores:	Inventors
recóndita:	hidden
pasé:	happens
edades;:	ages;
viajado:	traveled
actuando:	acting
forjan:	forge
abrigar:	shelter
conversión:	conversion
zozobras:	anxiety
esfuerza:	strive
Apocalipsis.:	Apocalypse.
hacedores:	doers
Prefieren:	They prefer
otra.:	other.
llevadera:	bearable
intelectual;:	intellectual;
convicción:	conviction
explicados.:	explained.
vividos:	lived
mundos:	worlds
alguna.:	some.
febrilmente:	feverishly
Recuerdo:	Memory
Detenido.:	Arrested.
Tiempo:	Time
Visitador:	Visitor
prestado.:	provided.
Fui:	I went
creído:	believed
agobiadora:	overwhelming
varón...»:	male..."
Naturaleza:	Nature
149
:	149
marido.:	husband.
Mujer:	Women
compasión::	compassion:
implorante:	imploring
Sacado:	Taken
destruirlo.:	destroy it.
compareciendo:	appearing
apelación:	appeal
justificarse:	justify
externas:	external
adquiridos:	acquired
derechos:	rights
balbuciente.:	stammering
intenta:	try
lacerado:	lacerated
gime:	moans
ordenara.:	would order.
echaría:	would throw
movería:	would move
aliento:	breath
recupero:	recovery
desgarradas.:	torn.
toses:	you cough
derramo:	i spill
Lleno:	Full
quemadura.:	burn.
dentro.:	within.
alfileres:	pins
eriza:	hedgehog
ensordecido.:	deafened
Quedo:	I stay
recién...»:	newly..."
griego—.:	Greek-.
«Mujer:	"Women
hace.:	does.
diga:	say
hable:	speak
fusil.»:	gun."
matarme:	kill me
trabajar::	work:
sacan;:	they take out;
estúpida;:	stupid;
Gente:	People
«Gente:	"People
viniendo:	coming
sospechado::	suspected:
recogió:	picked up
confidencias:	confidences
finge:	pretends
interesarme:	be interested
Adelantado;:	Advanced;
conocí:	I met
hermano:	brother
aparatosamente:	spectacularly
explotación.:	exploitation.
ofrezco:	I offer
buscarme:	look for me
dejará:	will leave
codicia—.:	greed-.
—cosa:	-What
aguardaré:	wait
dilación::	delay:
resigno:	I resign
Despechado:	Dismissed
escuchen.:	listen.
temiendo:	fearing
piensa:	think
dialogar:	dialogue
zarpar:	set sail
avisa:	newspaper
salgamos:	let's go out
difiera:	differ
suplico:	I beg
responde—.:	responds.
«Sí:	"Yeah
preocupa.:	worries.
imponerle:	impose
interesa.:	interest
encontrado.:	found.
tropiece:	tropie
denuncio:	complaint
descubrimiento;:	discovery;
desasosegado:	uneasy
buscados:	wanted
renuncian:	resign
sesos:	brains
trastornado:	deranged
kilates:	cheilitis
grandes.»:	big.”
ahogada—.:	drowned.
confía:	trust
catorce:	fourteen
«Diamantes:	«Diamonds
portentoso.:	portentous.
hundió:	sank
busca.:	search.
ahumado.:	smoked.
148
:	148
cristalitos:	crystallites
asegura:	assures
ruega:	beg
conspirador:	conspirator
hacía.:	toward.
vacila:	hesitate
atropella:	runs over
hilvanada.:	in the hilvana.
nada.:	nothing.
desconfiados:	suspicious
inquietos:	restless
penetrante:	penetrating
griego::	Greek:
rasgos:	traits
cambiado:	changed
semanas.:	weeks.
incisión.:	incision.
penetramos:	we penetrate
anegado;:	waterlogged;
interesa::	interest:
afectuosa:	affectionate
tónica:	tonic
halagador:	flattering
avellanado.:	countersunk.
escapara:	will escape
temiera:	feared
agarro:	grab
camisa.:	shirt.
envolviéndome:	involving me
pegar.:	to take.
retuerzo:	twist
necia:	foolish
exclamación:	exclamation
brutalidad:	brutality
doblándome:	bending
espinazo:	spine
rodilla:	knee
vigorosas:	vigorous
calleja:	quiet
reproducción.:	reproduction.
Alianza:	Alliance
resignadamente:	resignedly
importunar:	pester
escudillas:	bowls
lamen:	hand
escuchan:	they listen
taburetes:	stools
acuestan:	they lie down
inconfundible.:	unmistakable.
idéntico:	identical
Sur.:	On.
sobrecogiera:	would overwhelm
sistemáticas:	systematic
grabaciones:	recordings
Descubiertas:	Discovered
perro-chamán:	shaman-dog
más—:	further-
—nunca:	-never
invariablemente:	invariably
duración:	duration
rocas:	rocks
esucho:	Written by S.
cántico:	chant
entonan:	they intone
picado:	chopped
mandato:	mandate
apaga:	turn off
invertido:	invested
ruidos:	noises
relevo:	relief
espesuras:	thickets
posaran.:	they will put
manzana:	apple
acariciable:	caressable
mutación:	mutation
intermitencias:	intermittencies
adelgaza:	lose weight
hincha:	fan
conservando:	preserving
esculturas:	sculptures
aislado:	isolated
estremecidas:	trembling
viaje—.:	journey-.
proseguir:	pursue
—preocupado:	—concerned
esfuerzos:	efforts
aguzado:	sharpened
crítico:	critical
147
:	147
tediosa.:	tedious
seria:	he would be
transcurren:	pass
Simón.:	Simon.
invitaciones:	invitations
tentadoras:	tempting
desoyendo:	ignoring
urgido:	urgent
abrigo:	shelter
«También:	"Also
guía.:	guide.
regresará»:	will return"
regresará...:	will return...
promueve:	promotes
inmovilizado:	immobilized
Titán:	Titan
irregulares—:	irregular—
estrofas:	stanzas
ocupo:	I occupy
magníficamente:	magnificently
arrumbado:	tidy
espesan:	thicken
llenando:	filling
angustia.:	distress.
semblante...:	countenance...
mudado:	changed
informadores:	informants
trastocados:	upset
serlo:	be
andado:	walked
desandar:	unravel
comete:	commit
demás—.:	others.
negado:	denied
—dueño:	-owner
proponga:	propose
hazaña:	feat
repetir:	repeat
privilegios:	privileges
envanecido:	conceited
repartido:	distributed
trillado:	trite
vivirlo::	live it:
inconscientemente:	unconsciously
excepcionales:	exceptional
Buscando:	Searching
aleja.:	move away
adormecida.:	asleep.
darían:	would give
advertida:	warned
misteriosamente:	mysteriously
secuestrado:	kidnapped
Neolítico:	Neolithic
vuelo.:	flight.
expresarme:	express myself
faltaban:	were missing
audífonos:	earphones
146
:	146
Mandatarios:	Representatives
regresar.:	go back.
tentación:	temptation
decisiva::	decisive:
sometido:	lost
terrores:	terrors
apelación.:	appeal.
poniéndome:	putting me
podamos:	we can
demorando:	delaying
creciente.:	growing.
respeto»:	I respect"
«por:	"by
Riendo:	Laughing
entender.:	to understand.
Digo:	I say
desbordado:	overflowed
momentos.:	moments.
descompuesto:	decomposed
machetazos.:	machetes
afincarse:	settle
encontrarla::	find it:
podremos:	we can
mojarse:	get wet
meterse:	get in
caigo:	I fall
«Posible:	"Possible
posible»:	possible"
idénticos:	identical
mansedumbre.:	meekness.
considerando:	considering
contratiempo.:	setback.
augurio.:	best wishes.
parecería:	it would seem
inverso:	reverse
remando:	rowing
lleno.:	full.
comenzamos:	we start
marca.:	mark.
hoias.:	hoya
dintel:	lintel
estrecha.:	narrow
fuerza.:	force.
advertirla:	warn her
valla:	municipality
seguimos:	we follow
troncos.:	trunks.
navegado.:	navigated.
virar:	to turn
recordaría:	I would remember
espolón:	spur
Navegamos:	We sail
encontrarlas.:	find them.
habremos:	we will have
borra:	drill
existen:	there are
superpuestas.:	overlapping.
mareo.:	dizziness.
iguales:	equal
afianzando:	strengthening
chistar.:	joke
indicaciones:	indications
segundos;:	seconds;
145
:	145
cuenta;:	account;
darme:	give me
asaltan:	assault
fatigan:	exhausting
Seguimos:	We follow
interroga.:	question.
infinito.:	infinite.
alargarse:	lengthen
lenta:	level
acercamos:	we approach
señalo:	I point out
bochorno:	embarrassment
Culcán...:	Culcan...
emplumadas::	feathered:
triada:	triad
presididos:	chaired
lanzados:	launched
Guacamayos-
Bólidos:	Macaws-
Racing cars
Cóndores-Mensajeros:	Condors-Messengers
Pájaros-Soles:	Birds-Suns
Águila-Rocío:	Eagle-Dew
Pájaro-Trueno:	Thunder-Bird
majestades:	majesties
desfile:	parade
montañas—:	mountains-
mirarlos:	look at them
dibujados:	drawn
pintados:	painted
ornadas:	ornate
empinado:	prancing
graznar:	grazier
esquimales:	eskimos
Pájaro-Espíritu:	Spirit-Bird
Pájaro:	Bird
desempeñados:	performed
omnipresencia:	omnipresence
concierto.:	concert.
alborotar:	disturb
bandada:	flock
triángulo:	triangle
aplausos.:	applause.
abofetean:	in the palm of your hand
plomizas:	leaden
aletas:	fins
erizando:	erizing
atropellan:	run over
chocan:	they collide
saltan:	they jump
cardumen:	shoal
oscurecido:	darkened
azufre.:	sulfur.
sacarlo:	take it out
pegar:	to take
bastaría:	would be enough
apretadas:	tight
revolotean:	they flutter
estación:	season
llovido:	rained
caudalosa:	mighty
crecida:	spate
podrida:	rotten
levantaron:	they lifted
literalmente:	literally
reventado:	busted
apoderarse:	seize
Han:	He
asomarse:	lean out
Acaba:	It's over
144
:	144
quiero.:	wanna.
afinco:	hard
servirlos—.:	serve them.
galeras:	guys
espaldero:	espalier
bogavante:	lobster
dilema::	dilemma:
plantea:	poses
Pruebas;:	Evidence;
amanecidos.:	dawns.
albor:	dawn
macerar:	macerate
recogiendo:	picking
Rúbricas:	Rubrics
ostenta:	boasts
escapé:	exhaust
Sonrío:	I smile
dolorosos:	painful
embates:	clashes
corto:	short
sopesar:	balance
tiñe:	dyes
volverme:	come back
muslos;:	thighs;
cierne.:	hovers.
hablan:	they talk
Huyo:	That one
bolge.:	area.
Miedo:	Fear
miedo::	fear:
asalta:	assault
edición.:	edition.
imponga:	impose
buscar;:	look for;
canse:	get tired
alejarlo:	push it away
conjurarlo:	conjure it
superstición:	superstition
vaga:	vacancy
precaución:	caution
elección:	choice
laberinto.:	maze.
abrió:	opened
romántico:	romantic
acierto:	success
zanjado:	ditched
agüero.:	omen.
tejen:	save
alivio.:	relief.
deliciosa:	delicious
aldea...:	village...
desprendo:	I detach
Llegado:	arrived
agarrara:	will grab
brújula:	compass
ramas.:	remaining.
identificación:	ID
incisa:	engraved
Buscaré:	I will search
cordel:	string
trazada:	traced
—aquella:	-that
guiarlo:	guide him
comprometo:	I commit
navegado:	navigated
seguiré:	I will continue
encontré:	I found
llevarme:	take me
143
:	143
mayores.:	older.
patronas:	cartridges
Inés:	Agnes
Otro:	Other
inexplorados:	unexplored
puestas.:	set.
así»:	So"
encontrara:	will find
dominios:	domains
hollar:	cases
pretendieron:	they intended
aviso:	Notice
tórax:	chest
trueque.:	barter.
mercancías:	goods
navegados:	navigated
remontar:	reassemble
zapatero:	shoe
aindiado:	further
ataúdes:	coffins
medía:	average
carpintero:	carpenter
manatíes:	manatees
rato—.:	mouse-.
comensales:	diners
vasos:	vases
Pido:	I ask
cenizas.:	ashes
grisura:	torn
arrugada:	wrinkled
rescoldo:	ember
sabiduría:	wisdom
ardorosa:	ardent
lumbre:	fire
desconocidas.:	unknown.
bellotas:	acorns
pernil:	ham
chisporrotea:	sizzles
vainilla:	in vain
terrateniente.:	landowner.
poseedor:	holder
ello;:	it;
rezando:	praying
proclama:	proclamation
horcones:	forks
cobija:	blanket
tomarlo::	take it:
deslindes.:	demarcations.
cercados:	fenced
innato:	innate
estuario:	estuary
inmensas.:	immense.
transporte:	transport
precarios:	precarious
cultivado:	cultivated
enrolladas:	rolled up
echándose:	laying down
naturalidad:	naturalness
solteras:	single
siglo.:	century.
medicinas:	medicines
aceites:	oils
pólvora:	gunpowder
latas:	cans
estantes:	bookshelves
rollos:	rolls
mixta:	mixed
transformada:	transformed
catedral.:	cathedral.
matas;:	fed;
142
:	142
cromos:	trading cards
cándido:	candid
correas:	straps
reventarles:	burst them
pesaran:	retirement
empila:	stacked
mecidas:	measures
sorpresa::	surprise:
guiaba:	guided
muchacho:	young guy
retarla:	challenge her
mismo::	same:
otorgarse:	be granted
mejillas.:	cheeks.
desfiguro:	disfigure
detener:	arrest
morían:	they died
muertes:	deaths
cuerpo.:	body.
impuestas:	imposed
mutilaciones:	mutilations
sangrientas:	bloody
ablaciones:	ablations
Puedo:	Can
desmenuzado:	crumbled
escuadrado:	squared
castrado;:	castrated;
viejísimo:	very old
arrancado:	torn off
pedernal:	flint
flacas:	skinny
costillas:	ribs
flecharlo:	arrow it
desnudado:	stripped
aduanas:	customs
almacenes:	warehouses
caminando:	walking
seguí:	I continued
crucé:	crossing
amaneció:	it dawned
Incapaz:	Unable
dormidos.:	asleep
hospitales:	hospitals
funerarias:	funeral homes
lonjas:	markets
anduve:	I walked
regresaría:	I would return
huí:	I fled
vestí:	I dressed
advertencia.:	warning.
echada:	cast
artículo—:	article-
—decía:	—he said
Petroglifos.:	Petroglyphs.
entrecana.:	grey-haired
lucía:	lucia
él.»:	he."
retrato:	portrait
conocimos;:	we met;
«Creo:	"Believe
barato:	AFFORDABLE
boletín:	bulletin
Abriendo:	Opening
verdadero.:	TRUE.
suscripción:	subscription
aceptado:	accepted
sorteando:	raffling
compartiera:	would share
monja:	only
religiosa:	religious
velador.:	pedestal table.
publicación:	publication
tomó:	took
141
:	141
favorables.:	favorable.
recobrado:	recovered
sintió:	felt
tomarse:	take
amenazadoramente:	threateningly
asimilaba:	assimilated
cortada:	cut
espíritu::	spirit:
cobraba:	charged
tuviera—:	had—
personificándose:	personifying
conjunto:	set
Sagitario:	Sagittarius
consultas.:	consultations.
preferible:	preferable
pago:	pay
poseída:	possessed
Cualquier:	Any
desprecio.:	contempt.
envuelve.:	wraps
une:	a
definitiva:	definitive
sorpresas:	surprises
abstinencia:	abstinence
quiso:	wanted
accedí:	I agreed
manejó:	management
hábilmente:	skillfully
comprometería:	would compromise
consecuencia;:	consequence;
privarme:	deprive myself
necio:	foolish
holgadas:	baggy
ponerse:	put on
llenó:	full
terminadas.:	finished.
astrológicas:	astrological
consultas:	queries
alevosía:	treachery
entereza:	fortitude
socavar:	undermine
arreglarse:	get ready
moderación.:	moderation.
crédito:	credit
seducción:	seduction
intentos:	attempts
frustrar:	frustrate
decidido:	decided
margarina;:	Margarine;
hedor:	stench
alumbrada:	lighting
toleraba:	tolerated
abrazado:	embraced
verdaderos.:	true.
magnánimamente:	magnanimously
atribuyéndolo:	attributing it
enfermara:	nurse
echaba:	threw
rectamente—.:	uprightly-.
mentir:	lie
confianza:	trust
inocente:	innocent
Nicolás.:	Nicholas.
remozado:	renovated
lujuria.:	lust.
castigan:	punish
llagas:	sores
siguientes:	following
arrepentimiento:	repentance
plegaria:	prayer
unía:	united
juntos:	together
reñido:	close
desamparo.:	helplessness.
cedería:	would give in
tocador:	dresser
revueltos:	scrambled
afeites:	you leave
percibir:	perceive
calados:	silent
cubrecama:	bedspread
rezaba:	prayed
amenazaba:	threatened
aterrorizada:	terrified
sufrimientos::	sufferings:
indecibles:	unspeakable
desdoblamiento:	unfolding
140
:	140
impedirlo.:	prevent it.
luchaba:	fought
burdel:	brothel
condujera:	would drive
afirmada:	asserted
definido:	defined
escozor:	stinging
apesadumbra.:	sorrow
discutir.:	to discuss.
escucharla.:	listen to it.
fuera.:	out.
haré:	I will
consulta:	consultation
«Si:	"And
libro.:	book.
cercano.:	nearby.
librarse.»:	get free."
circunstancias:	circumstances
vinculada:	linked
Psicoanálisis::	Psychoanalysis:
afecto.:	keen.
desea:	want
perspectiva:	perspective
ocultas::	hidden:
Ciencias:	Sciences
posición.:	position.
Egipto::	Egypt:
«CÁRCEL.:	"JAIL.
sueños::	dreams:
hojear:	leaf through
librería:	bookshop
entro:	within
Carceri:	Prisons
Invenzioni:	Inventions
aguafuerte:	etching
colorido:	colorful
caballo.:	horse.
frente.:	forehead.
desviación:	deviation
ligera:	light
lontananza:	distance
multiplicaban:	they multiplied
suplicio:	torture
pilares:	pillars
prisión:	prison
soñé:	I dreamed
Anoche:	Last night
augurios:	omens
Busco:	I'm looking
prensa.:	press.
horóscopos:	horoscopes
excelente.:	excellent.
vitrina;:	showcase;
expuesta:	exposed
agüero:	omen
araña:	spider
presagios:	omens
imposibilidad:	impossibility
Abetos:	Fir trees
resuello.:	wheeze.
asomaba:	appeared
fogatas:	campfires
mojadas:	wet
leñas:	firewood
tacto:	touch
Algunas:	Some
aplacamiento.:	appeasement.
procura:	search
adormilan:	sleepy
otoño:	autumn
herrumbrosos:	rusty
conducen:	drive
caminatas:	walks
interminables:	endless
emprendo:	I undertake
encaja:	fits
viene.:	he comes.
Tarda:	Afternoon
suspende:	suspend
¡Ay:	Yes
alusiones::	allusions:
lacerantes:	tearing
cargarse:	load
tierna:	tender
encontrarme:	find me
amargura:	bitterness
fortuitos—.:	fortuitous.
trastocaron:	disrupted
—día:	-day
casualidad:	chance
abriera:	would open
estampan:	stamp
encuadernado:	bound
139
:	139
maravilladas:	amazed
lecturas:	readings
anunciando:	advertising
paquete:	package
cazuela:	casserole
armarios.:	wardrobes.
cocinan:	they cook
fuman:	they smoke
suelas:	soles
nieve:	snow
lavan:	stage
lanzado:	launched
cordeles:	twine
entretejen:	interweave
ir.:	and
semana.:	week.
cobrarlos:	charge them
desgana:	reluctance
ejecuto:	I execute
instrumentación:	instrumentation
encargos:	charges
cuantía:	amount
necesito:	need
divorciado:	divorced
aspirantes:	aspirants
infructuosamente:	vainly
buscado:	sought
estudios.:	studies.
asistente:	assistant
publicitaria:	advertising
perdona:	sorry
derramadas.:	spilled.
margarinas:	margarine
alfombras:	rugs
estudiantes:	students
experto:	expert
advirtiendo:	warning
recibe:	receive
luminosos.:	luminous.
anuncios:	advertisements
aceras:	sidewalks
encontrándome:	finding me
firmar:	sign
firmo:	the company
secretarios:	secretaries
interrogo:	I ask
aguardo:	I wait
viajo:	I travel
esquinas:	corners
doblo:	doublo
eliminada:	eliminated
embrollo:	imbroglio
negaba—.:	he denied.
procedimiento:	procedure
amoralidad:	amorality
tornear:	turn
plenamente:	fully
darse:	give
sacrificando:	sacrificing
vacilado:	hesitated
santuario:	sanctuary
impuesta:	imposed
torturara:	will torture
Secesión:	Secession
vendimia.:	vintage.
viña:	came
edifica:	build
despreciable:	negligible
gravidez.:	pregnancy.
indicio:	indication
explota:	explode
enredado:	tangled
simplificar:	simplify
alarma.:	alarm.
embarazo:	pregnancy
nación.:	nation.
jueces:	judges
representando:	representing
carmín:	carmine
encarnizada:	fierce
difuminar:	blur
internacional:	International
vil:	will
Tuve:	Had
abominación.:	abomination.
transgresor:	offender
considerarme:	consider me
Pastores:	Shepherds
perdonaba:	forgave
instancia:	instance
tembloroso.:	trembling.
dobló:	folded
reportaje:	reportage
devueltas:	returned
138
:	138
octubre):	October)
cómitre.:	comitre
mazo:	the little one
Hombre-Ninguno:	Man-None
Hombre-Avispa:	Wasp-Man
acepto:	I accept
intacto;:	intact;
nacido.:	born.
envejece:	gets old
cansa:	tired
contemplarlo;:	contemplate it;
futuro.:	future.
pretérito:	past tense
barajado:	shuffled
posibles—.:	possible—.
Icarias:	Ikarias
permitidas:	permitted
Utopías:	Utopias
porvenir:	future
acordándome:	remembering
lugar::	place:
limón:	lemon
recio:	tough
dividido.:	divided.
contado:	counted
laberinto:	maze
espacio.:	space.
lanzadas:	thrown
cornisas:	cornices
pregonados:	heralded
títulos:	titles
expuestas:	exposed
anuncia::	announces:
lugares—.:	places—.
muevan:	move
higos:	figs
caigan:	fall
Sello:	Seal
Sexto:	Sixth
apertura:	opening
devuelto:	returned
ocurrir.:	occur.
simiente:	seed
publicidad;:	advertising;
tensos:	tense
interpelaciones:	interpellations
servidumbres;:	easements;
colectividad:	community
reprimenda:	reprimand
atajado:	shortcut
impulso:	impulse
rebeldía:	rebellion
apetencia:	appetite
destinos.:	destinations.
forjarse:	forge
biblioteca.:	library.
esencias:	essences
Estas:	It is
creadores.:	creators.
imitando:	imitating
Occidente:	West
renovar:	renew
Querían:	they wanted
perseguida.:	persecuted.
cartesiano:	Cartesian
cogitante:	thinking
calificador:	qualifier
colocaban:	they placed
«bárbaras»:	«barbarians»
calificadas:	qualified
—
cosas:	—
things
bárbaras:	barbarians
barbarie:	barbarism
Buscaban:	They were looking
Método:	Method
Discurso:	Speech
137
:	137
fetiches:	fetishes
africanos:	Africans
blandían:	the mixture
risible:	laughable
razón.:	reason.
debieran:	should
fervores:	fervor
savias:	swordfish
rejuvenecerse:	rejuvenate
primitivos—.:	primitives—.
batería:	battery
instintivas:	instinctive
energías:	energies
enigmáticos:	enigmatic
vaciados:	emptied
exhiben:	exhibit
pintura:	paint
vitrina:	showcase
plazas:	places
bosta:	they will be
zócalos:	sockets
magistralmente:	masterfully
cubriendo:	covering
soñando:	ringing
apisonar—.:	अपिसोनार—.
comunica:	communicate
seda:	this
contactos:	contacts
abrazos:	hugs
propiciando:	enabling
apagan:	turn off
rítmicos.:	rhythmic.
movida:	moved
ingredientes:	ingredients
rodea.:	surrounds
Reconocido:	Recognized
filtraciones.:	leaks.
bóveda:	vault
remeda:	remedy
burgués»—.:	bourgeois"-.
«espíritu:	"spirit
fiel:	fell
—aunque:	-although
rancios:	stale
locura:	craziness
nada—:	nothing-
—muniqueses:	—muniques
rococós:	rococo
panorámicas:	panoramic
vistas:	views
Hornig:	Horny
cochero:	coachman
Baviera:	Bavaria
agrandadas:	enlarged
intermitentemente:	intermittently
rozados:	rubbed
giratorio:	rotary
móvil:	mobile
hipocampos:	hippocampi
iluminadas:	illuminated
grutas:	caves
trozos:	pieces
estuco:	stucco
estrado:	platform
astrágalo.:	astragalus.
clepsidra:	hourglass
costillar:	rib
exangüe:	bloodless
desollados:	skinned
desesperanza:	hopelessness
pétreos:	stony
falos:	will fall
muletas:	crutches
ciclistas:	cyclists
bicicletas:	bicycles
áridas:	arid
llanuras:	plains
sótano:	basement
divertirse:	enjoy
góticos.:	goths.
luminosa:	bright
veníamos:	we came
fatigados:	fatigued
desamparados:	helpless
fuguen:	the fugue
tampoco:	neither
repondrán:	will replenish
Vivieron:	They lived
nutricias.:	nutricies.
empresas:	companies
vendieron:	they sold
extenuados:	exhausted
ahogar:	drown
circundante:	surrounding
retazos:	scraps
fachadas:	facades
136
:	136
encrespamiento:	inking
ocurrencia:	occurrence
estilo.:	style.
sustituirlos:	replace them
secarse:	dry up
acantos:	acanthus
ejecutados:	executed
entablamentos:	entablatures
agonizantes:	dying
edificios:	buildings
enfermas:	sick
tenidas:	had
coagulada:	coagulated
pringoso:	catch
trofeo:	trophy
ornamento:	ornament
aplicado:	applied
arquitecto:	architect
bucráneo:	bucranium
triglifos:	triglyphs
antiguo::	ancient:
asienta:	nods
implicaciones.:	implications.
luciferada:	luciferated
propiciatoria:	propitiatory
percusión:	percussion
gaje:	grows
enmascarado:	masked
purificación:	purification
desconozca::	don't know:
inscripciones:	registrations
enjoyaron.:	they bejeweled
almendra:	almond
abeto:	fir
bautismo:	baptism
almendras:	almonds
Epifanía:	Epiphany
Buscan:	They search
gestos.:	gestures.
simbólica:	symbolic
arroz:	rice
reciben:	receive
anillos:	rings
intercambian:	they exchange
casan:	feet
hacen.:	do.
asisten:	assistant
advierto:	I warn
congregados:	congregants
percatarme:	notice
acompaña.:	accompanies
escucharse:	listen
hombres::	men:
mayoría:	most
ininteligibilidad:	unintelligibility
Dei:	Of the
atris:	black
—plantatus:	- planted
multiplicatur::	is multiplied:
Libani:	Lebanon
cedrus:	cedar
—
Sicut:	-
Like
florebit::	will bloom
gregoriano::	Gregorian:
muertas.:	dead
repleto:	full
foso:	pit
malentendido.:	misunderstanding.
escuelas:	schools
latín:	Latin
sacerdote.:	priest.
nocturno:	night
congregado:	congregated
cirios::	candles:
amarillor:	yellower
deambulatorio.:	ambulatory
resuenan:	resonate
invitan:	invite
ahumadas:	smoked
tiembla:	trembles
socavón:	sinkhole
comprada;:	purchased;
gabán:	overcoat
garita:	sentry box
avanzado:	advanced
hornacina:	niche
paradas.:	stops.
momias:	mummies
aturdidos:	stunned
soldadas:	welded
escaparates:	escapes
resguardados:	sheltered
espacios:	spaces
angostos:	narrow
Descubro:	I find out
prisa.:	hurry.
inválidos:	invalid
135
:	135
comercios:	shops
progresar:	to progress
ajustarme:	adjust
logro:	achievement
semáforo.:	traffic light.
semáforo:	traffic light
agitación:	agitation
restablece:	resets
reinante;:	reigning;
pulsación:	pulsation
constancia:	constancy
tranvía:	tram
permite:	allows
encenderse:	light
corresponde:	corresponds
orgánicas.:	organic.
voluntades:	wills
acera:	pavement
descubrir:	discover
adquirido:	acquired
tarde):	late)
(Más:	(Further
escaleras.:	stairs.
bajé:	I went down
Cansado:	Tired
remoto;:	remote;
gemidos.:	moans.
adolorida:	sore
mirarme:	look at me
infantil:	children's
humilde:	humble
avilantez:	degrade
defenderla:	defend her
naciendo:	being born
doblándose:	bending
desolado:	bleak
Temis:	It was
embarazo.:	pregnancy.
Justicia.:	Justice.
encarnación:	incarnation
Poder:	Can
femenina:	feminine
majestuosa:	majestic
estatua:	the state
Átala.:	Atala.
ridiculizante:	ridiculous
designaba:	designated
embrolladas:	muddled
tramitaciones:	procedures
pérfidos:	perfidious
lazos:	ties
confundiría:	would confuse
sinuosos:	sinuous
atado:	tied
advirtió:	warned
modelarla:	with models
negrura:	blackness
atiesada:	Atisara
Helada:	Frost
fiscales.:	prosecutors.
abogados:	lawyers
registro:	record
bajó:	low
paroxismo...:	paroxysm...
ascendía:	ascended
monólogo:	monologue
lacerarse:	lacerate
aplazados:	postponed
dramáticas:	dramatic
inhibiciones:	inhibitions
Sospecho:	I suspect
justeza.:	fairness.
apoyando:	supporting
delgados:	thin
gestos::	gestures:
impresionó:	impressed
escenario.:	scenery.
alzó:	raised
inquebrantable.:	unwavering.
expone:	exposes
alterado:	changed
repetí:	I repeated
colocó:	placed
amenazada:	threatened
distensión:	distension
serpiente.:	snake.
rastreada:	tracked
plantando:	planting
prestaban:	they lent
134
:	134
aumentar:	increase
divirtiendo:	having fun
aposento:	chamber
caballería.:	chivalry.
secretos:	secrets
callaban:	they were silent
pruebas:	evidence
prestigios:	impressive
comunes;:	common;
asidero:	handle
llaves.:	keys.
requería:	required
incomprensible:	incomprehensible
imprevisto:	sudden
presentando:	presenting
saqué:	I took out
decisivo:	decisive
asestar:	deal
enfriar.:	cool.
puestos:	positions
vinos:	wines
departamento:	department
dispuesta:	willing
delicada:	delicate
conclusión:	conclusion
reconfortante:	comforting
faltaría:	would be missing
previsto:	predicted
anticipación:	anticipation
suyas:	his
colocadas:	placed
pantuflas:	slippers
velador:	pedestal table
mejores:	best
arreglada:	fixed
magnánimo.:	magnanimous.
sollozante:	sobbing
vendría:	would come
castigada:	punished
comprensión:	comprehension
endulzando:	sweetening
aceptar.:	accept.
generosa:	generous
compasión:	compassion
mejor.:	better.
verdad—.:	TRUE-.
moradas:	purple
devuelta:	returned
regresara:	will return
significaban:	they meant
desprecio:	contempt
vicios:	vices
desprendimiento:	detachment
Sigue.»:	Go on."
Sigue...:	Go on...
«Sigue...:	"Go on...
operación:	operation
estertor:	rattle
jadeante:	panting
desplomada:	collapsed
físico.:	physical.
impudor:	impudence
juvenil:	youth
adornado:	decorated
injustificada.:	unjustified.
aparentemente:	apparently
ruptura:	rupture
acarrea:	carries
trastornos:	disorders
distante;:	distant;
detalle:	detail
revelado:	revealed
añadir:	add
vindicativa:	vindictive
séptimo:	seventh
fornicación:	fornication
reducida:	reduced
antepuesta:	anteposed
Culpé:	Culpe
dinero.:	money.
innegable:	undeniable
abyecta:	abject
asistiera:	would attend
largando:	letting go
precipité:	precipitate
contenerse:	contain
estallido:	pop
adelantarme:	get ahead
hundido:	sunken
crispadas:	tense
mucho—:	a lot-
defecto:	flaw
mueca:	grin
trágicas:	tragic
yesosa:	of sauce
palabras;:	words;
ridículo.:	ridiculous.
oportunidad.:	chance.
pérfida:	perfidious
evidenciado:	evidenced
equívoco:	misconception
querida.:	dear.
133
:	133
ironía::	irony:
malvada:	evil
vislumbrar:	glimpse
impostura.:	imposture.
vengando:	avenging
entender::	to understand:
entiendan:	understand
interesados:	interested
basta:	it just is
derribara:	would knock down
voluntariamente:	voluntarily
Completa:	Complete
primitivos.:	primitives.
cosmogónicas:	cosmogonic
confiada:	confident
aprovecha:	take advantage
astrología:	astrology
estudiosa:	studious
relaciones.:	relations.
índole:	nature
justificar:	justify
erudición:	erudition
despliegue:	deployment
evidentemente:	evidently
debidos:	due
Pitágoras:	Pythagoras
nombra:	name
indostánicos:	Hindustani
movimientos;:	movements;
lluvia»:	rain"
especialista:	specialist
risibles:	laughable
errores:	errors
cometiendo:	committing
aterradora:	terrifying
intrepidez:	fearlessness
planetaria.:	planetary.
jerarquía:	hierarchy
relacionaron:	related
astrológico:	astrological
enfoque:	approach
organográfico:	organographic
estudiaba:	I studied
colaboradora:	collaborator
sorpresivo:	surprising
declaró:	declared
tenida:	had
relata:	reports
revelaciones:	revelations
despreciable—:	negligible-
tabloide:	tabloid
—tomado:	-taken
artículo:	article
escándalo.:	scandal.
coloquio:	colloquium
fotografía:	photograph
trozo:	piece
encendidos:	on
violento:	violent
decirle:	tell
temidos:	feared
retarda:	slows down
distracción:	distraction
alegro:	glad
deslizado:	slipped
vecino:	neighbor
recorte:	cutout
inclinado:	inclined
vez...:	time...
devuelve:	returns
falsas:	fake
arsenales:	arsenals
producido:	produced
sutil:	subtle
muerto.:	dead.
entrepaños:	shelves
alineados:	aligned
aquello.:	that.
Ninguno:	None
entrara:	will enter
potestad:	power
arrogarse:	assume
atreviera:	dared
indignado:	indignant
extrañamente:	strangely
reposo»:	repose"
«Tómese:	«Take
empresa::	enterprise:
candilejas.:	footlights.
apagar:	to switch off
telón:	curtain
Ayuntamiento:	City hall
vestido.:	dress.
modelado:	modeling
entendidos:	understood
guiños:	winks
tribulaciones:	tribulations
persuasivamente:	persuasively
Protagonista:	Hero
quitar:	remove
agotarse:	run out
presiente:	present
engrandecida:	enlarged
Griseldis:	in Griseld
hablarle:	talk to him
Penélope:	Penelope
bodas;:	white;
ración—:	ration-
desflo:	deflo
—esta:	-this
132
:	132
aplaudir.:	applaud.
dicha:	bliss
ofrecerse:	offer
artimañas:	tricks
admirar:	admire
diversa:	different
matizada:	nuanced
actuación:	performance
actualidades:	news
camarógrafo:	cameraman
esbelta:	slender
acompañará:	will accompany
declaración:	declaration
breve:	brief
citó:	cited
coloca:	put
sorprendido;:	surprised;
golosina:	candy
cartera;:	briefcase;
oblea:	wafer
importante:	important
jaqueca:	migraine
alivia:	relieve
acecha;:	stalks;
fotógrafo:	photographer
entona:	gas
inasible;:	ungraspable;
ubicua:	ubiquitous
resurgir:	resurface
desaparece:	disappears
desliza:	slide
partes;:	parts;
bailarina.:	ballerina.
movilidad:	mobility
ama:	or
usurpa:	usurp
iniciativa:	initiative
quitando:	removing
gravitación:	gravitation
desenredando:	unraveling
enredando:	getting tangled up
vida::	life:
retratos:	portraits
Ayuntamiento.:	City hall.
encamino:	on the way
Escoltado:	Escorted
decían.:	they said.
desaparecen:	disappear
concurrencia:	concurrence
olvidado::	forgotten:
surgir:	to emerge
envuelven:	they wrap
ya—.:	of—.
—completamente:	-completely
públicas:	public
comisionado:	commissioner
sincronización:	synchronization
finalmente:	finally
bailarina:	ballerina
cerámicas:	ceramics
pintor:	painter
municipalidad:	municipality
gobierno:	government
Facultades;:	Faculties;
Decanos:	Deans
encabezada:	headed
delegación:	delegation
emocionado;:	thrilled;
aeródromo.:	aerodrome.
rotos:	broken
cegado:	blind
prorrumpir:	break out
viste:	showed
tejido:	tissue
reconozco:	I recognize
flancos;:	flanks;
abrigos:	shelters
escalerilla:	ladder
señalen:	point out
librar:	librate
repudio.:	repudiation.
acallan:	silence
desarman:	disarm
asistidos:	assisted
amada:	loved
ejercer:	exercise
tiranías::	tyrannies:
combatir:	combat
mí—.:	my-.
deserción:	desertion
brusca:	abrupt
explicaría:	would explain
—gravidez:	-pregnancy
agravarse:	get worse
remordimientos.:	regrets.
plantearé:	I will raise
treinta:	thirty
Cobraré:	I will charge
relato.:	report.
veracidad:	veracity
sucedidos:	successful
indígenas:	indigenous
suramericano:	south american
escritor:	writer
«misión»:	"mission"
hambriento:	hungry
kilómetros:	kilometers
131
:	131
atravesando:	passing through
fugarme:	run away
logré:	I managed
desconfiada:	suspicious
tribmás:	tribmore
venderé:	I will sell
inspiran:	inspire
plantado:	planted
«misión:	"mission
reportes:	reports
refirieron:	they referred
visitantes:	visitors
equivaldría:	would be equivalent
ahora—.:	now-.
—ya:	—of
innumerables:	countless
exclusividad:	exclusiveness
reservarle:	reserve
acepté:	I accepted
meses.:	months.
rutinario:	routine
acoplado:	coupled
desventura:	misfortune
emergido:	emerged
inteligible:	intelligible
parasitarios:	parasitic
despedida:	farewell
tomaría:	would take
permaneciera:	would remain
grité:	I screamed
incluían:	included
hispánicas:	hispanic
traería:	would bring
Aterrado:	Grounded
decirme.:	tell me
entendí:	understood
reía:	laughed
Lloraba:	I cried
teléfono.:	telephone.
venida:	coming
Kappelmeister:	Bandmaster
embuste.:	scam.
arrumba:	rumba
embustero.:	liar.
aplaudir:	applaud
aplaudirme:	applaud me
disponen:	they have
pendientes:	earrings
orbe:	the world
ciernen:	hover
capaces:	capable
Millones:	Millions
cornadas.:	gored.
toreo:	bullfighting
albur:	dace
riesgos:	risks
elegido:	elected
desempeño:	performance
bárbaros:	barbarians
enternece:	internecially
hacinados:	overcrowded
fríamente:	coldly
sobrecoge:	overwhelms
holgada:	baggy
irritado.:	irritated.
enterando:	finding out
evoquen:	evoke
Ana:	Well
Crónica:	Chronicle
Pequeña:	Small
infringir:	infringe
talento:	talent
investigación:	investigation
mártir:	martyr
refieren:	refer
persistente:	persistent
temática:	thematic
ejemplar.:	copy.
lectores:	readers
presentarme:	introduce myself
empeña:	pawn
congraciarse:	ingratiate
aviadores:	aviators
premiar:	reward
generosamente:	generously
sobremanera::	exceedingly:
130
:	130
conyugal.:	conjugal.
cuadro:	chart
trazado:	having sex
mimetismo-mágico-rítmico:	magic-rhythmic mimicry
absurda:	absurd
á:	on
uniforme:	uniform
Jesús:	Jesus
regañadientes—:	reluctant—
incluso:	even
publicadas:	published
nacional.:	national.
desaparición:	disappearance
geográfica:	geographical
inexplorada:	unexplored
exigiera:	demanded
luego—:	then-
sanguinarias:	bloodthirsty
tribus:	three
sabios:	wise
viajeros:	travelers
evocaron:	evoked
tarde—:	afternoon—
fuere:	was
—quien:	-who
comienzos:	beginnings
mías:	mine
redacción:	wording
réplica:	replica
sollozar:	sob
Rompió:	Broke
corazonada.:	hunch.
cuentan—:	count—
estando:	standing
Organográfico:	Organographic
irguiendo:	erecting
periodistas:	journalists
recortes:	clippings
mostraron:	showed
envidiarme::	envy me:
atracción:	attraction
contrasentido:	contradiction
desarrollarse.:	develop.
tendrán:	they will have
humos:	fumes
papel::	paper:
interpretar:	interpret
clima.:	climate.
cronologías:	chronologies
escaparon:	they escaped
pasmosa:	astonishing
cálculo:	calculation
opresión:	oppression
angustiosa:	distressing
alegran:	they rejoice
ventanillas.:	windows.
paseando:	strolling
luminosas:	luminous
ubicar:	locate
divierten:	have fun
Algunos:	Some
encenderse.:	light.
humo—:	in it—
colosos:	colossi
carcomidos:	eaten away
truncos:	trunks
manso:	meek
Acabamos:	We're done
viviendo.:	living.
SEXTO:	SIXTH
129
:	129
alcanzando.:	reaching.
altitud:	altitude
visibilidad:	visibility
volaremos:	we will fly
Avisado:	Warned
aisla:	isolate
ascendemos:	we ascend
bonanza:	see them
buitres.:	vultures.
Lejos:	Far
viuda.:	widow.
olfato—:	smell—
—dividida:	—divided
camina:	walk
128
:	128
cogollo.:	heart.
sacude:	shake
molinetes:	pinwheels
vecinos.:	neighbors.
giramos:	we turn
Meseta:	Plateau
rasando:	rage
abajo;:	below;
quedan:	remain
ruedas:	wheels
encajar:	fit
trepidante:	trembling
explanada;:	esplanade;
motores:	engines
metálica:	metallic
seña.:	sign.
cabina:	cabin
jubilosa.:	jubilant
prorrumpen:	they break out
avión.:	plane.
acariciado.:	caressed
abrazaban:	they hugged
zafa:	they died
beso:	kiss
mirarme.:	look at me
rencoroso:	rancorous
llevar»:	carry"
puedes:	can
valiosa:	valuable
entrego:	I deliver
despectiva.:	derogatory
encogiéndose:	shrinking
decidir.:	decide.
explico:	I explain
imperativo.:	imperative.
nombrando.:	naming.
mirara:	will look
mirara.:	would look
liberador.:	liberating.
mensaje:	message
sabía.:	knew.
aplauso—:	applause-
huera:	hula
envanecerme:	get puffed up
Aunque:	Although
torceduras.:	sprains.
curaran:	curan
creyera:	believed
curado:	cured
ejucutándola:	ejucutandola
entenderían:	they would understand
destinada:	intended
correo:	mail
quedando:	staying
producida:	produced
estaría:	would be
obstaculizar:	hinder
comprendiera:	would understand
Aceptaría:	I would accept
malograda.:	ill-fated
ataba:	he won't be
cumplimiento:	compliance
exigía:	demanded
brusca;:	abrupt;
adaptación:	adaptation
lealmente:	loyally
explicarle:	explain
comunicado:	statement
enviado:	sent
requieren:	require
legítimo:	legitimate
gobierna:	governs
adoctrina:	doctrine
Caza:	Hunt
cumplen:	they comply
demás.:	others.
iré:	I will go
decisión::	decision:
aluminio.:	aluminum.
cabaña.:	cabin.
turbaban:	they were disturbing
presencias:	presences
librarán:	will free
127
:	127
deberían:	should
apremiarme.:	urge me
enérgicamente:	strongly
colocan.:	place.
Cuadernos:	Notebooks
hongos.:	fungus.
importa.:	matters.
demostrar:	demonstrate
altiva:	haughty
míos:	mine
evitan:	they avoid
expresa:	express
aquí...:	here...
pomos:	snitches
expresadas:	expressed
tinta::	ink:
carecer:	lack
brasa.:	ember
asadas:	roasted
innecesario:	unnecessary
aficiones:	hobbies
tiempos::	time:
prescindir:	dispense with
resumen:	summary
carezco:	I lack
ánimo.:	cheer up.
desplaza:	move
jorth.:	Jorath.
poema::	poem:
piloto.:	pilot.
imperioso:	imperious
libros.:	books.
Recomienza:	Restart
poderosa:	powerful
denegación.:	denial.
arrancar:	start up
suelte:	release
marcharme:	leave
recoja:	pick up
encontrara.:	will find
dondequiera:	wherever
alcanzarme:	reach me
inaplazable:	unavoidable
convocatoria:	call
expresado:	voiced
emplea::	uses:
atronador.:	thunderous.
hablarme:	talk to me
ajenos;:	aliens;
telones:	curtains
frondosos.:	leafy.
espesarse;:	thicken;
habitado.:	inhabited.
deshabitado:	unoccupied
ablanda.:	softens
desconcierta:	baffles
líquido:	liquid
miope—.:	short-sighted—.
lentes:	glasses
sanos:	healthy
coincidir:	coincide
aciertan:	they get it right
litografía:	lithography
tiro:	number
movidas:	moved
incómodamente:	uncomfortably
superponemos:	we overlap
estampa;:	print;
agitarse:	shake
Conservatorio.:	Conservatory.
hurtadillas:	sneaking
fumaba:	I smoked
126
:	126
cigarrillos:	cigarettes
renace:	reborn
cigarrillo:	cigarette
marisco:	seafood
apio:	celery
té:	has
apremiantes:	pressing
paladar.:	palate.
celosa:	jealous
olvidadas.:	forgotten.
apetencias:	desires
lúcida:	lucid
sorbo:	sip
probado:	tried
beber.:	to drink.
desenrosca:	unscrew
aparta:	separate
vendas:	sales
conservas:	preserves
medicamentos:	medicines
entregan:	deliver
aterrizaje:	landing
habérseme:	have me
paracaídas:	parachute
impermeables:	waterproof
bulto:	bulk
sacan:	they take out
Romanticismo.:	Romance.
presente—:	present—
identifican:	identify
regresándose:	returning
ochenta:	eighty
cifra:	cipher
recta.:	straight.
línea:	line
fraguas:	forges
buscaban.:	they were looking for
agitar:	shake
pensaron:	they thought
huella:	fingerprint
suelos:	floors
otear:	otter
aglomeración:	agglomeration
divisar:	spot
asombraron:	they amazed
turbonada.:	turbo nada.
buscar.:	look for.
orientados:	oriented
rescate.:	rescue.
cuantioso:	large
reactualizando:	updating
publicados:	published
torturado.:	tortured.
insidiosa:	insidious
sanguinarios.:	bloodthirsty
quién—:	who-
buscando.:	searching.
aviones:	airplanes
aparato::	device:
impulso.:	impulse.
frena:	brake
oportuno:	timely
viraje:	turn
bajo.:	low.
vacilando:	hesitating
despejar:	clear
apartarlos:	separate them
alborotando:	rioting
contagioso:	contagious
explanada:	esplanade
señal.:	sign.
Advierto:	I warn
titubeo:	hesitation
paralelamente:	in parallel
hélice:	propeller
removido:	removed
explosión;:	burst;
un.:	and.
125
:	125
aferrada:	clinging
separan:	separate
nuevamente;:	again;
romperse:	break
prestas:	lend
gente.:	people.
«cosa:	"What
pasmados:	stunned
Neolítico.:	Neolithic.
aterrorizados:	terrified
huyen:	Huyen
gira:	tour
volteo.:	I turn.
precipitación:	precipitation
encima.:	on.
fusil.:	gun.
arreció:	escalated
mojada.:	wet
derritiendo.:	melting.
cerosa:	waxy
escurría:	drained
desintegraba:	disintegrated
encarnada:	red
emborronando:	blurring
desdibujando:	blurring
mirar::	look:
forcé:	strength
estampido:	stamped
rebotando:	bouncing
confundieron:	confused
disparos:	shots
Sonaron:	They sounded
derecho.:	right.
perdigones:	shot
izquierdo:	left
cañón:	canon
habías:	had
atreven:	dare
arrancó:	started
colérico:	choleric
Ejecutor.:	Executor.
iniciaría:	would start
deslindes:	demarcations
levantan:	they lift
siempre.:	always.
cambiar:	change
gatillo:	trigger
apretara:	will squeeze
resistía:	resisted
rapiña.:	rapine.
anulado:	annulled
suprimido:	deleted
contaminándola:	contaminating it
destrozado:	destroyed
indignante:	outrageous
inmundo;:	unclean;
Apagar:	To switch off
apagarlos.:	turn them off.
dependía:	it depended
mirando.:	looking.
ahí::	there:
apuntar.:	aim.
Volví:	I returned
—apremió—.:	-pressure-.
«Dispara:	«Shoot
pedía:	asked
Bajé:	I went down
onjejión».:	objection".
onjejión...:	objection...
«onjejión...:	"objection...
como::	as:
ininteligible:	unintelligible
gatillo.:	trigger.
decidía:	decided
Levanté:	Levant
«Apunta:	«Aim
mirándonos:	looking at us
detuvo::	stopped:
rastreador:	tracker
Avanzamos:	We move forward
llovida.:	rained
trillo:	trill
concertábamos:	we arranged
leproso.:	leper.
oscurecer:	darken
Anduvimos:	We walked
huellas.:	footprints.
encorvado:	curved
pasas:	passes
violación:	rape
Llegamos:	we arrived
manatí.:	manatee.
124
:	124
fangosas:	muddy
turbulentas:	turbulent
echamos:	we cast
Envolvimos:	We get involved
seguirlo.:	follow him.
Poniendo:	putting
perdurar:	endure
armeros:	gunsmiths
troquel:	die
cañones:	cannons
fusiles:	rifles
brazo::	arm:
deslizó:	slipped
apretaba:	squeezed
agresiva.:	aggressive
consentida:	consented
repugnante:	disgusting
culpables:	guilty
fuésemos:	we were
indecible::	unspeakable:
indignación:	indignation
sublimado.:	sublimate.
ungüento:	ointment
frota:	fleet
entrepiernas:	of the enterprises
tapón:	plug
latente.:	latent.
reproche:	reproach
aquí»:	here"
alrededores.:	surroundings.
batida:	beat
garrotes:	clubs
armados:	armed
hilachas:	threads
hemorragia:	hemorrhage
restañando:	stagnating
desgarrándole:	tearing him
violarla:	rape her
supo:	knew
lograron:	they managed
horrorizado:	horrified
rodillas.:	knees.
ensangrentada:	bloody
atroz::	atrocious:
aguacero.:	downpour.
arropada:	clothed
Capitán.:	Captain.
corno:	horn
trompa:	trunk
imaginaciones:	imaginations
sorprendo:	I surprise
dedos...:	fingers...
ensalivarse:	ensalivate
antebrazo:	forearm
doblar:	fold
sopesarlo:	weigh it
Puse:	Party
oído.:	ear.
cobrar:	charge
volvimos:	we came back
calores:	heats
adueñó:	took over
oyó:	heard
respiro:	breath
terminado.:	finished.
creímos:	we believed
espárrago:	asparagus
nacen:	are born
estiércol:	manure
serosidades:	serosities
nacera:	had been born
orina:	urine
excreción:	excretion
engendrará:	will engender
engendrarse:	beget
podre:	rotten
Llegaron:	They arrived
amenas.:	pleasant.
venenosa.:	poisonous.
culebra:	snake
fundido:	cast
blandido:	brandished
cortarse:	cut
enormemente.:	enormously.
aburriéndose:	getting bored
tejiendo:	knitting
pasan:	pass
rastreado:	tracked
desaparecieron:	they disappeared
123
:	123
lluvia.:	rain.
cumpliendo:	fulfilling
estuvieran:	were
filtraciones:	leaks
farallones:	cliffs
podrida.:	rotten
criaturas:	creatures
cantaron:	sing
treparon:	they climbed
multiplicaron:	multiplied
malangas;:	oily;
regocija;:	rejoices;
traidoras.:	traitors
hundiéndome:	sinking
fango.:	mud.
arrancadas:	sprints
diques:	discs
ahogados.:	drowned
balsas:	the voice
acarreando:	carrying
necesitada:	needy
mantiene:	maintains
difuminado:	blurred
interminables.:	endless
escuece:	stings
negativa:	negative
matrimonio:	marriage
mentar:	ment
primeros.:	first.
guiones:	scripts
enmendando:	amending
papel—:	paper-
consumo:	consumption
imaginativa:	imagination
están.:	are.
quedarán:	fall
llenadas:	filled
sesenta:	sixty
oportunas:	timely
siembras:	sowing
procederse:	proceed
reparar:	fix
pasarse:	go
quiera.:	want.
propone:	proposes
compadecido:	pitied
volvería.:	I would go back.
casara:	married
Mulato:	Mulatto
cantar::	sing:
carabelas—:	caravels—
sonó:	rang
invito:	invitation
Horrorizado:	Horrified
sanciones.:	sanctions.
atrevía:	dared
venir:	come
122
:	122
andando.:	going.
alforja:	saddlebag
separarlo:	separate it
horquillada:	bracketed
empuja:	push
enojo—.:	anger-.
«¡Vete:	«¡Yourself
pavor.:	dread.
muda:	time
arrodillada:	kneeling
gesticula:	gestures
pesadilla:	nightmare
ceniza.:	ash.
tráquea:	windpipe
desintegración:	disintegration
licuarse:	liquefy
disolverse:	dissolve
endurecido:	hard
sujeta:	subject
escoria:	slag
piltrafa:	piltraf
residuo:	residue
selvas.:	jungles.
depositarios:	depositories
Levítico:	Leviticus
clásica:	classic
lepra;:	leprosy;
falta...:	lack...
legalizado:	legalized
firmado:	signed
reunida.:	reunited.
indiada:	Indian
fórmula:	formula
pronunciar:	pronounce
aspira:	aspire
casarse;:	marry;
obligarla:	force her
inferioridad:	inferiority
humillado:	humiliated
réplica.:	replica.
campesina:	peasant
Confieso:	I confess
cuidado».:	Careful".
dé:	god
depende:	it depends
sentenciosa—:	judgmental—
unión:	union
Casarse:	Marry
desórdenes:	disorders
entronizado:	enthroned
abandona:	abandon
guardias:	guards
mandar:	to send
alguno.:	some.
valer:	worth
abandonarlo:	abandon it
facultad:	faculty
descarría:	astray
asiste:	attend
defenderse:	fend
recurso:	resource
temen::	friend:
recóndito:	recondite
argumentación:	argumentation
celoso:	jealous
matrimonio.:	marriage.
catecúmenos:	catechumens
protagonista:	hero
casemos.:	let's get married
deseable:	desirable
decido:	a decision
hable.:	speak.
podrá:	will be able
121
:	121
exigencia.:	requirement.
recuesto:	reclining
calmado:	calm
hacérselo:	do it
totalmente:	fully
escribiré:	I will write
escribirlo:	write it
Debo:	I must
nunca.:	never.
ejecute:	run
trombón.:	thrombo.
cornos:	horns
fagot:	bassoon
clarinetes:	clarinets
órgano::	organ:
libreta::	notebook:
quedará:	will remain
jurarme:	swear to me
risible.:	laughable.
insentato:	senseless
escuchada:	heard
esperado:	expected
audiencias.:	hearings.
especialmente:	especially
ejecutada.:	executed.
cartas:	cards
escribiendo:	writing
exasperado:	exasperated
estúpido:	idiot
escollo:	stumbling block
toparse:	bump
menguado:	diminished
maniatado:	tied up
cohibe:	control
generosidad:	generosity
avara:	spacious
papel;:	paper;
milímetro:	millimeter
pendolista:	commuter
astucias:	cunning
Aprieto:	Fix
llueve:	it's raining
envolturas:	wrappers
yutas:	Yuta
tejidos:	fabrics
pródiga:	prodigal
Alguna:	Some
problema.:	problem.
urgencia:	urgency
cuaderno.:	notebook.
voces...:	you...
—episodio:	-episode
lírico:	lyrical
introduciendo:	introducing
esfuerzo.:	effort.
lográndolo:	achieving it
concentrarme:	concentrate
cavilación:	rumination
huir:	flee
inquebrantable:	unwavering
propuesto:	proposed
echará:	will cast
acepto—:	I accept—
plácida:	placid
falseándose:	falsifying
digo—:	I say—
mentir.:	lie.
dilema:	dilemma
disparadero.:	shooting
coloque:	put
actuará:	will act
tácticas:	tactics
probables:	probable
canalladas.:	scoundrels
Dios».:	God".
«marido:	"husband
posible—.:	possible-.
albergar:	harbor
120
:	120
engañarla:	cheat on her
estimo:	esteem
atañe:	concerns
lealtad:	loyalty
mentira;:	lie;
estafas.:	scams.
contentos.:	happy
pedida:	requested
prestarme:	lend me
delito:	crime
bigamia:	bigamy
importaría:	would matter
ya.:	of.
molesta::	bothers:
literarios:	literary
reacciones:	reactions
fáciles:	easy
confesarme:	confess to me
tamborileo.:	patter.
anchas:	wide
temporalmente:	temporarily
calafateada:	the caulking
rajaduras:	cracks
salgo:	I'm on my way out
carcajada:	laugh
consentido:	spoiled
asperjar:	asparagus
tracen:	trace
samaritano.:	Samaritan.
sayal:	skirts
escondidas:	hidden
ataduras:	restraints
relucir:	shine
decirle::	tell him:
guardando:	watching
encojo:	I shrink
Sorprendido:	Surprised
oyeran:	they would hear
recogerse:	pick up
rebaño:	herd
ovejas:	sheep
justificando:	justifying
legitimidad:	legitimacy
tolera:	tolerate
improperios:	expletives
profiere:	utters
insulta:	stroke
iracundo:	wrathful
tiempo;:	time;
hincharse:	swell
ministerio.:	ministry.
diciéndole:	telling him
aplomo:	aplomb
Repentinamente:	suddenly
instaurarse:	establish
santificadas:	sanctified
uniones:	unions
casarme:	get married
Afirma:	states
evangelización:	evangelism
entorpecer:	hinder
sensatas:	sensible
cultas:	cultured
cuestión.:	question.
balbuceo:	babbling
concubinato:	concubinage
Casamientos.:	Marriages.
Registro:	Record
Entierros:	Burials
Bautizo:	Christening
quejarme:	complain
Enojado:	Angry
pautados.:	ruled.
partituras:	sheet music
necesitan:	need
carabelas:	caravels
siendo:	being
tocadores:	players
arpistas:	harpists
músicas:	songs
establece:	establishes
Según:	According to
calmar:	calm
músicas.:	songs.
despilfarrarse:	waste
consignar:	record
actas:	minutes
destinaban:	they destined
explicándome:	explaining
último»:	last"
expliqué:	explain
tragaba.:	swallowed
preguntó:	asked
pedir:	ask
Acabo:	Just
119
:	119
estados:	states
duerma:	sleep
descifrar.:	decipher.
taquigrafía:	shorthand
reduciendo:	reducing
brote:	outbreak
impulsado:	driven
jubilosa:	jubilant
escribo:	I write
ceñir.:	gird.
criticar:	criticize
tachar:	cross out
atrepellándose:	running over
llenaran:	will fill
bajadas:	descents
invento:	invention
polémicas:	controversies
manifiestos:	manifestos
conciertos:	concerts
levantarse.:	get up.
pugnara:	fight
acallando:	silencing
asepsia:	asepsis
orden»:	order"
«regreso:	"return
impresionar:	impress
inventarse.:	invent
sonante:	resounding
disimulada:	disguised
pobreza:	poverty
ricercare:	search
trepidaban:	trembled
contrarios:	opposites
martillados:	hammered
desencuadrados:	out of frame
redondas—:	round—
existido:	existed
corcheas:	eighth notes
Concerti:	Concerts
autores:	authors
aquejado:	afflicted
locomotriz:	locomotive
lentos:	boards
enjundia:	substance
olvidarlos:	forget them
olvidaban:	they forgot
actualizado:	updated
«desarrollar»—:	"develop"-
—
la:	—
the
calco:	cast
perdurabilidad:	perdurability
rispidos:	harsh
registros:	records
adrede:	ready
asperezas:	roughness
disonancias:	dissonances
espíritu.:	spirit.
contrapuntísticas:	contrapuntal
cantada:	sung
miércoles:	Wednesday
artesanal:	artisanal
Encadenado»:	Chained»
«Prometeo:	"Prometheus
«Preludio»:	"Prelude"
desventurado:	hapless
mañosa:	crafty
asemejaba:	resembled
invocación:	invocation
homofónico:	homophonic
inscriben:	enroll
convergentes:	convergent
termino:	TERMS
apuntado:	pointed
imperiosa:	imperious
detengo.:	I stop.
anunciará:	will announce
edificio:	building
vosotros.»:	you."
remaba:	of father
despojos:	remains
desgracia.:	misfortune.
quémame:	burn me
funerales;:	funeral;
abandones:	abandon
imploración::	entreaty:
preludio:	prelude
interpretaré:	I will interpret
gemido:	moan
118
:	118
caminos».:	paths.
«su:	"are
llora:	cry
colocar:	to place
lanzas.:	spears.
enlutadas:	mourners
imperceptiblemente:	imperceptibly
enternezca:	international
estructura:	structure
concibo:	I conceive
requerida:	required
sobras:	leftovers
derramado:	spilled
degollado:	beheaded
rebaños...:	flocks...
carnero:	SHEEP
daré:	I will give
sacrificaré:	I will sacrifice
Itaca:	Ithaca
prometo:	I promise
harina:	flour
Derramo:	I spill
libación:	libation
miel.:	Honey.
libaciones.:	libations.
«Hago:	"Do
solemne::	solemn:
evocación:	evocation
deseada.:	desired.
simplicidad:	simplicity
homérico:	Homeric
aligerar:	lighten
sencilla::	simple:
bambú.:	bamboo.
retoño:	shoot
garrapatas:	ticks
limpiar:	clean
sienta:	feel
molestar:	annoy
ceño.:	frown.
malos»:	bad»
«días:	"days
nervioso;:	highly strung;
alarma:	alarm
irritado:	irritated
Salgo:	I'm on my way out
peripecias.:	adventures
releo:	reread
necesito.:	need.
género:	gender
resultaría:	would result
astucias».:	cunning."
vástago:	stem
Laerte:	Laertes
majestad»:	majesty"
Cronos:	Chronos
invocatorias:	invocatory
usar:	to use
niego:	him
descorazonarme:	dishearten me
vacilación:	hesitation
empastadas:	pasted
—Estos:	-These
Gramática:	Grammar
Epítome:	Epitome
francés;:	French;
secundarios;:	secondary;
estudios:	studies
alemán:	German
Sabía:	Knew
¿cuál:	which
profunda.:	deep
desierta:	deserted
resabios.:	aftertaste
sorprenderme:	surprise me
ejecutado».:	executed".
«verme:	«don't give
enoja:	angry
artístico.:	artistic.
ejecución:	execution
obstáculo:	obstacle
constituiría:	would constitute
alejaría:	would distance
cristiana:	Christian
pareciéndose:	resembling
excelentes:	excellent
óperas:	operas
despoja:	strips
descubro:	I discover
Hojeando:	Browsing
libros::	books:
117
:	117
tendré:	I will have
caldearse:	get hot
lije:	pours
furia.:	rage
ménade:	maenad
irrumpen:	break in
infierno»:	hell"
«perras:	«bitches
reinan:	reign
arcilla:	clay
siento.:	I feel.
tormentas::	storms:
coros:	choirs
directas::	direct:
admirablemente:	admirably
correspondido:	reciprocated
conforme:	according to
resurrección:	Resurrection
implícito:	implicit
asocio:	association
encadenado:	chained
liberación:	release
Segundo:	Second
Desencadenado:	Unchained
proyecto:	project
regla:	ruler
sirviéndome:	serving me
trazo:	I bring
libretas;:	notebooks;
transcurrida...:	elapsed...
transcurrida:	elapsed
Cobraba:	He charged
faltaba.:	was missing.
intuía:	I intuited
resto::	rest:
músico:	musician
gruñir:	snarl
alternación:	alternation
reclamada:	defendant
nota:	use
necesitar:	need
exorcismo:	exorcism
palabra-célula:	word-cell
renació:	reborn
auténtico:	authentic
roían:	gnawed
babeantes:	drooling
creían:	they believed
superioridad:	superiority
ufanarme:	weapon
hombres;:	men;
lección:	lesson
orines.:	urine.
excrementos:	excrement
postrados:	prostrate
ponzoña:	poison
escuché:	listen
monstruos:	monsters
Paleolítico:	Paleolithic
resembrada:	reseeded
asombro::	astonishment:
reflexión.:	reflection.
sorprende:	surprise
momento...:	moment...
aprovechados:	taken advantage of
empezaban:	they started
inexplotados:	unexploited
eclesiásticos:	ecclesiastics
habilidoso:	skillful
trombón:	trombone
contrabajo:	double bass
flautín:	piccolo
diálogos:	dialogues
sorprendentes:	surprising
116
:	116
citaba:	cited
especulando:	speculating
defenderme:	defend myself
incitaciones.:	incitements.
riesgosas:	risky
entrañaba:	entailed
reinvención:	reinvention
engendrados:	begotten
musicales.:	musicals.
palabra-
célula:	word-
cell
indiscutible:	indisputable
intrincada:	intricate
presentada:	presented
simultaneidad:	simultaneity
percepción:	perception
oyente:	listener
prepararía:	would prepare
expresiva:	expressive
intensidad:	intensity
aumento:	increase
sinfónica:	symphonic
machihembradas:	mb lada s to town
concertadas:	concerted
armónico:	harmonic
polifónica:	polyphonic
coexistencia:	coexistence
contrapuntístico.:	contrapuntal.
enriquecimiento:	enrichment
compactado:	compressed
oposiciones:	oppositions
armónica:	harmonica
variación:	variation
coloreaba.:	colored
diversificaba:	diversified
sonoros:	sound
creaba:	created
compostelano.:	compost it
femenino—:	female-
masculino:	masculine
—elemento:	-element
primicial:	first time
sucesivas:	successive
ondulante.:	wavy.
añadía:	added
guirnalda:	wreath
salvaguardada::	safeguarded:
litúrgico:	liturgical
agregar:	add
decente:	decent
adornarla:	decorate it
firmus:	firm
cantus:	song
Catholici—:	Catholics
—Congaudeant:	- Let them rejoice
compostelano:	compost it
lejanos:	distant
impresionado:	impressed
posibles.:	possible.
aleaciones:	alloys
parche:	patch
hecho::	made:
vibrante:	vibrant
intervenciones:	interventions
afirmándose:	asserting
recitado:	recited
normales:	normal
períodos:	periods
delimitar:	delimit
puntuación:	score
discretamente:	discreetly
entrarían:	they would enter
Transformado:	Transformed
conditor—:	founder
rerum:	of things
—Aeterne:	-Eternally
ambrosiano:	ambrosian
centrado:	centered
afirmarse:	assert
empezaría:	would start
estribillo:	chorus
medidas:	measures
sucesiones:	successions
irían:	they would go
verbo-génesis.:	verb-genesis.
adjetivo.:	adjective.
necesitaran:	they will need
sustantivos:	nouns
auditorio:	auditorium
adelantara:	will advance
latín.:	latin.
Illa:	Ill
Irae:	of anger
ocurrió:	occurred
prosodia:	prosody
escansión:	scansion
pasara:	passed
impresionista—:	impressionistic-
estilización:	stylization
exageración:	exaggeration
115
:	115
surgiera:	arose
interesaba.:	was interested
vienesa:	viennese
escuela:	school
logros:	achievements
modernos:	modern
armónico;:	harmonic;
liberarla:	free her
acompañamiento:	accompaniment
enredar:	entangle
recitar:	recite
profanas.:	profane.
litúrgicas:	liturgical
repasado:	reviewed
enfocar:	focus
acoplar:	couple
meditado:	meditation
mismo—:	same-
flaqueza:	frailty
alejado:	away
actividades:	activities
estúpidas:	stupid
impuesto:	tax
pensamiento::	thought:
concretar:	specify
subraya.:	underlines.
delimita:	delimit
enmienda:	amendment
tacha:	blemish
conciencia;:	awareness;
nutre:	nourishes
lucubración;:	lucubration;
delirante:	delusional
inició:	start
goteras:	leaks
lámpara.:	lamp.
sublimado:	sublimate
trabajadas:	worked
gotas:	drops
transferencias:	transfers
descabelladas:	crazy
invenciones:	inventions
adocenadas:	cobbled
fumado:	smoking
mortificante:	mortifying
lúcido:	lucid
adoptar.:	adopt.
incertidumbre:	uncertainty
proyectaba:	projected
Concierto:	Concert
nacería:	would be born
pautado:	lined
droga:	drug
saliera:	came out
atormentaban.:	they tormented
produjo:	produced
opio::	youth:
fumar:	smoke
Muchos:	Many
entendieran.:	they would understand
leyeran:	they would read
palparan:	squander
inscrita:	registered
ordenación.:	ordering
asombrándose:	amazed
«cosa»:	"What"
espíritu;:	spirit;
construido:	built
preciso.:	necessary.
ordenarse:	order
dispersos:	scattered
disgregados:	disintegrated
compactación:	compaction
maduración:	maturation
trabajo::	job:
realizarse:	be realized
todavía—:	still-
—lejos:	-far
noches...:	nights...
arduas:	arduous
doquiera:	everywhere
odioso.:	hateful.
pareciendo:	seeming
huraña:	swearing
114
:	114
atardecer.:	sunset.
emergencia.:	emergency.
terminar:	finish
ayudado:	helped
invectivas:	invectives
apuntalable:	propable
apuntalar:	shore
anudado:	knotted
fraguado:	setting
llorar.:	cry.
llenaron:	they filled
lodo.:	official
desconcertados:	bewildered
cobija.:	blanket.
colgarlos:	hang them
colectados:	collected
goteras.:	leaks.
mudando:	changing
resecas:	parched
retumbando:	rumbling
oquedades:	cavities
colándose:	sneaking in
parecieron:	they seemed
truenos:	thunder
obertura:	opening
poema.:	poem.
sabrá:	will know
pardos:	brown
alfabeto:	alphabet
descubrirán:	they will discover
consistirán:	they will consist
estética:	aesthetics
preguntarme:	ask me
euritmia:	eurythmy
coreografía:	choreography
Ninguna:	None
brisa.:	breeze.
torbellino:	whirlwind
alborozan:	exult
vencimientos:	expirations
respiros:	breaths
pausas:	pauses
ascendente:	ascending
frondas;:	fronds;
estremecido.:	shuddered
retoños:	shoots
ligeras:	light
rondas:	rounds
organizan:	organize
poseen:	possess
Arboles.:	Trees.
fulgurante:	dazzling
acude.:	come
recobrada.:	recovered.
flecha:	arrow
disparar:	shoot
entesado:	entangled
incontenible:	irrepressible
brota:	break
bien.:	GOOD.
desaparecido.:	missing.
plexo:	plexus
aprensiones:	apprehensions
presentimientos:	hunches
inmotivadas:	unmotivated
angustias:	anguish
flaccida:	flaccid
traía:	brought
malas:	lazy
estructura.:	structure.
ceñidos:	tight
músculos:	muscles
escueto:	short
esqueleto::	skeleton:
apretando:	squeezing
adelgazado:	slimmed down
pescado:	fish
mañoco:	mancoco
alimentación:	feeding
parca:	park
ruda:	brown
escrita—:	writing—
113
:	113
épico:	epic
gesta:	guests
jirones:	tatters
ritualmente:	ritually
emborracha:	drunk
alianzas:	alliances
memorables:	memorable
duelos:	duels
ardides:	ploys
inventos:	inventions
princesas:	princesses
raptos:	abducted
intervinieron:	they intervened
desviados:	diverted
héroes:	heroes
victoriosa.:	victorious.
prodigios:	prodigies
arrasa:	rock
caribe:	Caribbean
fragmentos.:	fragments.
reconstruyendo:	rebuilding
epopeya:	epic
descubrí:	I discovered
anotarlo:	write it down
comprenderlo:	understand it
historiador:	historian
geólogo:	geologist
naturalista:	naturalist
ansioso.:	anxious.
paladar:	palate
habituarme:	get used to
pescar:	fish
holgarme:	relax
quemarme:	burn me
comparten:	share
reflexión:	reflection
destino—.:	destination-.
creerán:	will believe
—«por:	-"by
volverá:	will return
Estado::	State:
Razón:	Reason
reticencias:	reticence
aceptan:	accept
adivino:	soothsayer
hijo;:	son;
fronterizo.:	frontier.
remacharon:	riveted
marcas:	brands
explicaciones:	explanations
descubierto.:	uncovered.
odio:	hatred
dócil:	docile
amistoso:	friendly
humillaciones:	humiliations
maltratos:	abuse
rencor:	rancor
acota:	abound
gente»:	people"
sitio:	place
responde.:	responds.
marcharse»:	leave"
daría:	would give
manchan:	stain
víbora.:	snake.
echado:	lying
parricida:	parricide
condenaban:	they condemned
espectacular:	spectacular
impresionante:	awesome
instituya:	institute
hambre:	hunger
expulsado:	expelled
condenar:	condemn
vacilará:	will hesitate
vedada:	to carry
castigar:	punish
solemnemente:	solemnly
apoyarse:	lean
sospecharlo:	suspect it
jactanciosos:	boastful
escritos:	writings
cientos:	hundreds
instructivos:	instructions
poesía:	poetry
meditación:	meditation
solicitación:	solicitation
raudales—.:	torrents.
arrostrados:	faced
Pobre:	Poor
remanso.:	backwater.
traidora:	traitor
podrido:	rotten
disfrazado:	disguised
artero:	cunning
rugido:	roar
viajando:	traveling
fulminante:	fulminant
mordida:	bite
vampiros:	vampires
112
:	112
cartógrafos:	cartographers
Incógnitas:	Unknowns
Terras:	Lands
planteados:	raised
mayores.»:	older."
necesitarán:	will need
seamos:	let's be
reprobación:	reprobation
dirigirle:	direct you
castiga:	win
responde—:	respond—
instituir:	institute
horroroso:	horrible
inquieta:	restless
castigada»:	punished"
«será:	"it will be
infracción:	infraction
inmediatas:	immediate
realizar:	perform
remontando:	reassembling
apostar:	bet
acarreo:	haulage
tala:	story
anotadas:	noted
cuestiones:	issues
examen:	exam
conservación:	conservation
tajante:	cutting
urgencia.:	urgency.
debería:	ought
terminada:	finished
dónde.:	where.
invasión:	invasion
movilizándose:	mobilizing
ejecutar:	execute
conveniencia:	convenience
unanimidad:	unanimity
reconoce:	recognize
conjurado:	conjured
vertiente.:	slope.
narigón:	nose
trazando:	tracing
lograrse:	be achieved
terrenos:	land
cebolla:	onion
cultivo:	crop
realizado:	carried out
demanda:	demand
batey:	more
inundándose:	flooding
canalizar:	channel
tendrá:	will have
discutida:	discussed
orientación:	orientation
dirección:	address
Cabildo:	Council
Actas:	Minutes
Libro:	Book
acatarla:	abide by it
juran:	legal
justificándose:	justifying
mermado:	depleted
inconsiderada:	inconsiderate
emigración:	emigration
presentes.:	gifts.
emergencia:	emergency
levantamiento:	lifting
cervatillo:	fawn
hembra»:	female"
absoluta:	absolute
prohibición:	prohibition
instituye:	institutes
ciervas:	deer
cazado:	hunted
comprobado:	checked
escrito.:	written.
consignados:	consigned
provecho:	advantage
número:	number
traseras.:	rear.
guardado:	saved
legislando:	legislating
acentuado:	accentuated
Pertenecientes:	Belonging
colegial:	schoolgirl
tendida:	lying
Sentado:	Sitting
111
:	111
mismas.:	themselves.
miraban:	they looked
crónica:	chronicle
conjuntivitis:	conjunctivitis
pertenecerle:	belong to him
enmarañada:	tangled
motivos:	reasons
causado:	caused
intensa:	intense
fijaron:	they fixed
inmensamente:	immensely
parajes.:	places.
aventurarse:	venture
consideración:	consideration
burlona:	mocking
permití:	I allowed
Ningún:	No
regiones»:	regions»
sanguinarios:	bloodthirsty
perversos:	wicked
únicos:	unique
«Allí:	"Over there
nudoso::	nude:
hostil:	hostile
sombría:	gloomy
quebrados:	broken
pizarrosos:	slaty
descenso.:	descent.
iniciará:	will start
rúbricas:	rubrics
frías.:	cold
veamos:	let's see
desciendan:	descend
cumbre:	summit
sorprenda:	surprise
Tenemos:	Have
acortan:	shorten
alucinada:	hallucinated
hombres...:	men...
cobraron:	they charged
nombrados:	named
inhábiles:	unskilled
—obra:	-work
recreadas:	recreated
nombradas:	named
desaparecerán:	will disappear
arrojarme:	throw me
acabaría:	would end
existía:	existed
fascinar:	fascinate
dejara:	will leave
abismos;:	abysses;
demoníaco:	demonic
caldero:	cauldron
Inclinado:	Leaning
diabólica:	diabolical
parar:	to stop
germinan:	germinate
hulla:	corpse
petrificado:	petrified
duerme:	sleep
fósil:	fossil
Prehistoria.»:	Prehistory.”
desiertos:	deserts
saltaron:	they jumped
escalaron:	they climbed
atravesaron:	they crossed
servirle:	serve you
negadas:	denied
rebeldes:	rebels
fraile—.:	friar-.
huido:	fled
«Estas:	"It is
formas.:	shapes.
orgiástico:	orgiastic
mostruoso:	monstrous
anuda:	knot
enmaraña:	entangles
enrevesa:	convoluted
tallo.:	three.
desgarre:	tear
erupción:	rash
sanguinolentos:	bloody
pistilos:	pistils
faroles:	lanterns
bulbosas:	bulbous
madrépora:	madrepora
texturas:	textures
submarina:	underwater
tentáculo.:	tentacle.
mórbida:	morbid
membranosas:	membranous
110
:	110
pavorosas:	dreadful
medran:	they grow
cráter:	crater
Signos:	Signs
está...:	this...
dejándolo:	leaving it
herramientas:	tools
talladores:	carvers
ejército:	army
levantara:	will lift
gigantesco:	gigantic
erigir:	erect
explicarnos.:	explain to us.
acertamos:	we got it right
mediante:	through
ciclópeo:	cyclopean
lunas:	remedy
arribo.:	arrival.
fijada:	fixed
rúbrica:	rubric
egipcios:	egyptians
retirarse:	withdraw
encalló:	ran aground
repoblador:	repopulator
cavados:	dug
alzo:	I get up
aniquilan:	annihilate
sublevados:	uprisings
enrabecidos:	enraged
atruenan:	I'm sorry
apocalipsis:	apocalypse
pavoroso:	dreadful
moler:	grind
platos:	dishes
comales:	eat you
muerte;:	death;
rebelan:	they rebel
inventados:	invented
inicial:	initial
endurecer:	harden
suyo:	his
estudioso:	scholar
sorprendiéndome:	surprising me
Brujo.»:	Sorcerer."
Aprendiz:	Apprentice
presentido:	sensed
cosmogonía:	cosmogony
aún::	still:
adivinación:	guessing
fraile—:	friar-
quitchés:	quitches
sagrado:	sacred
desconocido.:	a stranger.
nuestros.:	our.
coincidente:	coincident
cosmogonías:	cosmogonies
emito:	young ones
Admirado:	Admired
rituales:	rituals
festivas:	festive
vestimentas:	garments
Tenochtitlán:	Tenochtitlan
emperadores:	emperors
plumas.:	feathers.
marcadas:	marked
armaduras.:	armor.
girasoles»:	sunflowers»
«indianos:	«Indians
pincel:	brush
catalnicas:	catalan
pericos:	parakeets
comadreos:	gossips
asustados:	scared
alborotoso:	rowdy
listados:	listed
carpinteros:	carpenters
laboriosidad:	industriousness
noche;:	evening;
paujíes:	paulie's
fosforescente:	phosphorescence
suspensión:	suspension
colibríes:	hummingbirds
Vimos:	We saw
solicitan:	request
¡Dios:	God
gritado::	yelled:
teológico:	theological
tucán:	toucan
rosadas:	pink
cotorras:	parrots
fastuosos:	lavish
escoltaron:	escorted
109
:	109
florecidos—:	flowered—
ricos:	rich
aventada:	suggested
paletadas:	paddles
recogidos:	collected
bizantinos:	Byzantines
mosaicos:	mosaics
molidas:	ground
erosión:	erosion
aridez:	aridity
teratología:	teratology
sacrilego—:	sacrilegious-
intruso:	intruder
vagamente:	vaguely
nieblas.:	fogs.
helada:	frost
surca:	furrow
fieltro:	felt
recortadas:	cropped
accidentado:	hilly
esquistos:	shales
descansamos:	we rest
pagado:	paid
pongan:	put
bultos:	lumps
torturarme:	torture me
hacerles:	make them
encargará:	will order
uso.:	use.
enser:	alike
reponer:	replenish
indispensables:	essential
proveerse:	provide
acostumbrado:	used to
enviaré:	I will send
desarrugar:	unwrinkle
comprender.:	grasp.
dolida:	hurt
brusco:	abrupt
aparto:	apart
bramido:	bellow
botija:	cylinder
sopla:	blows
resquemores.:	resquemores
desconfianza:	distrust
enterrar:	bury
romperlos:	break them
Debería:	Ought
vitrinas.:	showcases.
reclamo:	claim
perpetuo:	perpetually
hallaran:	cases
usurarios.:	usurers
préstamos:	loans
sacrificios:	sacrifices
entregaron:	they delivered
defección:	defection
responsabilidad:	responsibility
aceptará:	will accept
fiador.:	guarantor.
evadirme:	evade
solté:	I blurted out
castigados:	punished
arrinconarlos:	corner them
sirvió:	served
objetos-acreedores:	creditor-objects
echando:	of winter
atiesaron:	migraines
hinchadas:	swollen
protectoras:	protective
sujetaban:	they held
desaté:	let go
dolorosa.:	painful
acompañó:	accompanied
tambor-bastón-de-ritmo:	drum-rhythm-stick
sugerida:	suggested
ideado:	devised
sonará:	will sound
ahuecado:	hollow
Colgamos:	We hang up
premonición:	premonition
curvas:	curves
repetido:	repeated
tuviesen:	had
108
:	108
viguetería:	joists
amplia:	wide
reunirme:	meet
intelectual.:	intellectual.
quedarme:	stay
cavilaciones.:	overthinking.
pentáfonas...:	pentagons...
gamas:	ranges
generalizada:	widespread
destructoras:	destroyers
bellos:	beautiful
librescas.:	bookish.
aferrados:	clinging
levantarían:	they would lift
polvareda:	dust cloud
falaces:	fallacious
teorías:	theories
sonoro:	sonorous
interpretado:	interpreted
brotan:	sprout
fugas:	leaks
chapuzones:	dips
ronquidos:	snoring
rumores:	rumors
musical-estético:	musical-aesthetic
trino:	triune
gorjeo:	goryeo
imitar:	mock
sostener:	hold
dichas:	said
tonterías:	foolishness
originarse:	originate
alternar:	toggle
fingida:	feigned
cierto;:	TRUE;
originaba:	originated
monosílabo:	monosyllable
emprendía:	undertook
remota.:	remote.
hechicería:	sorcery
derivadas:	derivatives
pervivencia:	survival
arriesgadas:	risky
construyendo:	building
psicología:	psychology
razonamiento:	reasoning
mágico.:	magical.
ultratumba.:	beyond the grave
sierpes:	wyrms
mordeduras:	bites
faraón.:	Pharaoh.
preservar:	preserve
detienen:	stop
persas;:	Persians;
emperador:	emperor
resucita:	resurrect
Esquilo:	Squirrel
Pude:	Could
asistí:	I attended
trote:	trot
fijación:	fixation
otorga:	grants
primitiva:	primitive
hermanar:	twin
nuestro.:	our.
contemporáneo:	contemporary
religiosas:	religious
curativas:	bandages
instituciones:	institutions
albores:	dawn
pretenden:	intend
cuan:	how
absurda.:	absurd.
orígenes:	origins
cestería.:	basketry
trabajan:	they work
primogénito:	firstborn
cálida:	warm
padecidos:	sufferers
vigilancias:	surveillance
prohibiciones:	prohibitions
fealdades:	ugliness
sustraerse:	subtract
privilegio:	privilege
disfrute:	enjoyment
causan:	cause
servirlo.:	serve him.
ofrecerles:	offer them
felicidad:	happiness
crueldad:	cruelty
molestado:	bothered
naves.»:	ships.”
encadenarlos:	chain them
héroe—:	hero-
sollozantes:	sobbing
traerlos:	bring them
«Tuve:	"Had
olvidan:	they forget
107
:	107
fruta:	fruit
lotófagos:	lotus eaters
despacha:	dispatch
sonreír::	smile:
Recostado:	lying down
torceduras:	sprains
hundiré:	interior
repetirme:	repeat myself
hago.:	do.
mujer.:	women.
apegar:	attach
acomodos:	accommodations
habituarse:	get used to
hacinamiento:	overcrowding
prefiera:	prefer
determinación:	determination
varón.:	male.
reciba:	receive
recibirá:	will receive
docilidad:	docility
pregonero.:	crier.
menesteres:	necessities
encanallando:	plumbing
empuñar:	wield
Prefiero:	Prefer
inútil.:	useless.
agobiarse:	get overwhelmed
cargaba:	loaded
dejarán:	they will leave
alambre:	wire
ardilla:	squirrel
profesiones:	professions
impuso:	imposed
Sísifo:	Sisyphus
enseñan:	they teach
Trataré:	I will try
desierto...:	desert...
predicando:	preaching
enjuto:	lean
canas:	reeds
bañarán:	will bathe
vendrán:	they will come
gruesa:	gross
desembocan:	flow
matriz.:	headquarters.
integrarme:	integrate
caladas:	quiet
pulsaciones:	pulsations
seminales:	seminal
conductos:	ducts
endurecen:	harden
nuca:	nut
axilas:	armpits
oscurece:	darkens
pectorales:	pectorals
revienta:	burst
calienta:	heats
bañado:	bathed
nanadores:	nandores
muslo:	thigh
ennegrece:	blacken
expuesto:	exposed
asombrados:	amazed
travesura:	mischief
liberamos:	we release
vence:	wins
jadea:	gasp
edénico:	edenic
ocre.:	ocher.
tiñen:	dye
tanino:	tannin
cauces:	channels
encendidas:	lit
106
:	106
brotando:	sprouting
Pareja:	Couple
bañamos:	we bathe
pátina:	patina
debiera:	should
complejo:	complex
minúscula:	lower case
pigmentos:	pigments
Asomado:	Leaning
esmalta.:	enamel
cierzo:	north wind
sacuden:	shake
diluirse:	dilute
recostadas.:	lying down
acantilado:	cliff
aclaran:	clarify
adelgazan:	lose weight
tendiendo:	tending
Amanece:	dawn
excusa.:	excuse.
cebollas»:	onions»
sembrar:	sow
«Además:	"Besides
Henoch.:	Enoch.
erigirse:	stand up
comenzará:	will begin
rabioso:	rabid
«Alguien:	"Someone
Redención::	Redemption:
agresivo:	aggressive
abruptamente:	abruptly
ramo:	branch
ajustado:	tight
objetar:	object
religiones:	religions
aprendí:	I learned
aprendan:	learn
contarán:	count
distinguir:	distinguish
curas:	cures
naciente:	nascent
variante:	variant
hijos;:	children;
enseñar:	teach
despachó:	dispatch
cesado:	ceased
llovió:	it rained
salvó:	except
hinchara:	will swell
contemplábamos:	we contemplated
Fundador—:	Founder-
escrúpulos::	scruples:
astrales.:	astral
escorpiones:	scorpions
dibujan:	they draw
izados:	hoisted
—artesanos:	—artisans
desconocidos:	unknown
artesanos:	artisans
105
:	105
desembarcar.:	disembark.
asaltaron:	assaulted
Henoch»:	Enoch»
vivirse:	live
llegada.:	arrival.
sencillos:	simple
sucesos:	events
promovidos:	promoted
colectiva:	collective
explosiones:	explosions
sequía:	drought
abundante:	abundant
tibieza:	tepidity
contentan:	happy
residencia:	residence
acompañan:	accompany
escama:	scale
veneno:	poison
trajes:	suits
unidades:	units
asignado:	assigned
admiten:	admit
rigores.:	rigors.
Orden:	Order
antemano::	beforehand:
aceptados:	accepted
padecimientos:	ailments
renovadas:	renewed
frías:	cold
crueldades:	cruelties
tratable:	tractable
menosprecio:	disparagement
allá.»:	there."
regresan:	they return
Adelantado—:	Advanced-
«El:	"He
existir.:	exist.
sucumbe:	succumbs
atavismo:	atavism
gangrena.:	gangrene.
levantados;:	raised;
trabajosamente:	laboriously
venenosos:	poisonous
azotes:	spanking
cartógrafos.:	cartographers.
propia.:	own.
legislar:	legislate
búsqueda:	search
afana:	they are similar
Señala:	Point out
lápida:	stone
entierra:	buries
Firma:	Business
Gobierno.:	Government.
Levanta:	Get up
traza:	trace
arcadas.:	arcades.
puentes:	bridges
llegue:	I arrived
Puesto:	Position
hablarse:	talk
«fundar»:	"meetings"
verbo:	verb
Siente:	feel
huevos:	eggs
embalsamados:	embalmed
ostensiblemente:	ostensibly
comercia:	trade
suspicacias:	suspicions
apetencias.:	desires.
excesos:	excesses
trastornarlo:	upset it
ignorado:	ignored
invadiendo:	invading
seguirle:	follow him
tardarán:	will take
bolsillos:	pockets
Piensa:	Think
arrojan:	they throw
mozas:	girls
tardes:	afternoon
baña:	but
prospera.:	prosper.
interesando:	interesting
destetado:	weaned
becerro:	calf
cabra:	goat
atados:	tied
104
:	104
carpintería.:	carpentry.
apero:	conference
posturas:	postures
cambiarlo:	change it
estaño.:	tin.
Encuentra:	Finds
penurias:	hardships
convalecencia:	convalescence
extinción.:	extinction.
numerosa:	numerous
endeble:	flimsy
vástagos:	scions
piensan:	they think
hierbas.:	herbs.
curan:	cure
funeraria—:	mortuary-
—gente:	-people
pierna:	leg
engusanada:	to swallow
desemboca:	flows
hambruna.:	famine.
saltamontes:	grasshopper
noventa:	ninety
Camina:	walk
favorecido:	favored
buscadores.:	search engines.
afortunadas:	lucky
insistencias:	insistences
desengaños:	disappointments
llevado.:	carried.
izan:	be
poblaciones.:	populations.
coloreadas:	colored
incansablemente:	untiringly
Cunucunuma:	Conuconuma
obsesionado:	obsessed
libros;:	books;
bañar:	bathe
azahar:	noon
encargan:	they order
nuevos::	new:
aprende:	learn
recetarios:	recipe books
carcomido:	rotten
púlpito:	pulpit
edad:	age
envidia:	nvidia
parten:	the party
buba:	happen
aliviados:	relieved
curados:	cured
muestras:	samples
preguntan:	they ask
barrunto:	around
enfebrecidos:	feverish
hartarán:	will be fed up
mirífica:	myrific
arrancaron:	they started
vencidos:	defeated
Llegan:	They arrive
ignorado.:	ignored.
pasante:	intern
descorriendo:	slipping away
contraído:	contracted
abandonadas:	abandoned
leprosos:	lepers
sarnas:	similarly
rascan:	they scratch
palúdicos:	malaria
tembladeras:	scrapies
añagazas:	tricks
desconfiaran:	they will distrust
andén:	platform
tablas:	tables
bastones:	walking sticks
tientan:	tentan
desembarcadero:	disembarkation
bajan:	they go down
despacioso:	slow
moletas:	knuckles
linaza:	flax
transita:	transit
emético.:	emetic.
tártaro:	Tartarus
raíz:	root
vómica:	vomic
nuez:	nut
casera:	homemade
prescripción:	prescription
confían:	trust
maceraciones:	macerations
albergue.:	hostel.
botica:	drugstore
Vencido:	Overdue
cloacas.:	sewers.
carboneras:	charcoal pits
sótanos:	basements
suben:	they go up
jornadas;:	days;
103
:	103
nublada.:	cloudy
Santísimas:	Most Holy
Marías:	Marias
monjas;:	nuns;
hojaldres:	puff pastries
maitines:	meals
Hacia:	Toward
bolas:	balls
rebelde:	rebel
caduceo:	caduceus
batea:	Bataa
adelantaba:	advanced
diré:	I will say
llamarse:	call
apellido:	last name
«Pues:	"Well
rumbos.:	directions.
escucharé:	I will listen
recojan:	pick up
duerman:	sleep
hartado:	treasuredo
beben:	tremble
resina:	resin
burbujeante:	bubbly
articulaciones:	joints
ablando:	softening
intereso:	interest
Ayudo:	Ayuso
invadir:	invade
preguntas.:	questions.
vencidos.:	defeated.
preferentemente:	preferably
sólida:	solid
alienta:	encourages
teniéndose:	having
intransigencias:	intransigence
aspiraciones:	aspirations
interdictos:	interdicts
cánones:	canons
estorbo:	hindrance
fundar:	meeting
inmediato.:	immediate.
formular:	formulate
preparativos:	preparations
empero:	however
aquiescente:	acquiescing
Losada:	slab
fundaron:	founded
Ni:	In
eso.:	that.
raro.:	down.
imponente:	imposing
confieso:	I confess
hijos.»:	children."
criado:	created
Agustín:	Augustine
parió:	gave birth
fundador::	founder:
Gobernador:	Governor
alcalde:	mayor
mestizas:	mixed race
esposas:	wives
bienvenida:	welcome
desborda:	overflows
penalidades:	penalties
increíbles:	incredible
chivatos:	snitches
verracos:	voircos
sembrados:	sown
señalarme:	point me out
Catedral.»:	Cathedral."
levantaremos:	we will lift
«Frente:	"Forehead
volviéndose:	turning
indios...»:	Indians..."
bestias...:	beasts...
hijas...:	daughters...
Gobierno...:	Government...
blanquecino.:	whitish.
hogueras:	bonfires
establo.:	barn.
situadas:	situated
ventanas.:	windows.
divisa:	split
doscientos:	two hundred
102
:	102
desconcertado.:	embarrassed.
amarra:	tie
revestido:	coated
recibirlo:	receive it
mansas:	meek
pasándose:	passing
bordeándose:	bordering
Transcurren:	They pass
exasperantes:	exasperating
respirando:	breathing
fragancias:	fragrances
recobran:	recover
vivas:	lives
somnolencia:	sleepiness
arrulla:	coos
hombre;:	man;
invencida:	invincible
fundarse:	establish
Recuesto:	Reclining
órgano...:	organ...
tañedor:	keeper
edificada:	built
horrores:	horrors
sustraiga:	subtract
gobernar:	govern
Crear:	Create
verbo.:	verb.
conjugar:	combine
fundo:	bottom
Fundar:	Meetings
codiciadas.:	coveted.
repetírmelo:	repeat it
canso:	tired
secreto::	secret:
conducirnos:	drive us
bendice:	bless
desengañarla:	undeceive her
suerte.:	luck.
Alborozada:	Exhilarated
hacernos:	make us
Quiere:	Wants
aventureros.:	adventurers.
codicia:	greed
guía:	guide
apegado:	attached
Homero:	Homer
acaieno:	acaien
huellas:	footprints
mentiroso:	liar
manejos:	handling
avaro:	miserly
hallazgo;:	find;
Solitario:	Lonely
alzado:	raised
estatutos.:	statutes.
Cánticos:	Chants
101
:	101
abismo.:	abyss.
vacía:	empty
desordenada:	messy
sideral:	sidereal
Creador:	Creator
retrocediéramos:	we would go back
Creación.:	Creation.
Día:	Day
Cuarto:	Room
señorear:	lord
100
:	100
lumbreras:	luminaries
prueban:	they test
aparecidas:	appeared
vivientes.:	living.
trabaje:	work
abeja:	bee
arborescentes:	tree-like
huya:	come on
Terciario.:	Tertiary.
dragonadas:	dragonades
prehistóricos:	prehistoric
lepidosirenas:	lepidosirens
gimnotos:	Gymnotos
escualos:	sharks
cabezones:	big heads
laulaus:	tables
monstruosos:	monstrous
Abajo:	Below
vedado.:	prohibited.
dominio:	domain
explanadas.:	esplanades.
inmensidad:	immensity
magnas:	big
fausto:	auspicious
sobrecogidos:	overcoected
sentimos:	we feel
hablamos.:	talk later.
planeta.:	planet.
—meteoritas:	— meteorite
coágulos:	clots
rugosos:	rough
peñascos:	boulders
nieblas;:	fogs;
respiran:	they breathe
escarchas:	frosts
guardan:	they keep
lunares:	polka dots
planicies:	plains
adivina:	guess
derraman:	spill
estanques:	ponds
dividirse:	be divided
atronadores:	thunderous
acrecidos:	accreted
petrificada.:	petrified
jalonada:	drawn
arcoiris:	rainbow
deshace:	undo
cimera.:	summit
almenaje:	at least
inconmovible.:	immovable.
confabula:	conspires
fantasía:	fancy
severidad:	severity
rompiendo:	breaking
procesión.:	procession.
semejan:	they resemble
afila:	affiliate
biseles:	bezels
recorta:	crop
flanqueante:	flanking
basalto:	basalt
obelisco:	obelisk
quebrados.:	broken.
rectos:	straight
bruscos:	abrupt
aristas:	edges
morfología:	morphology
cabezas.:	heads.
túneles:	tunnels
conducir:	drive
Puertas:	Doors
madréporas.:	madreporas.
gigantescas:	gigantic
alvéolos:	alveoli
agrietados:	cracked
cilindros:	cylinders
majestad.:	majesty.
aplastante:	overwhelming
confiere:	confers
abolengo:	lineage
contemplarlos:	contemplate them
terrestre:	land
alzaron:	raised
telúrica.:	telluric.
tuvieron—:	had—
—cuando:	-when
vestidura:	clothing
Lavadas:	Washed
alzan:	rise
izar:	star
obligados:	obligated
quietos:	quiet
tramos:	sections
subiendo:	going up
Lentamente:	Slowly
crónicas.:	chronicles.
armazón:	warehouse
andamos:	we walk
99
:	99
Música.:	Music.
Nacimiento:	Birth
asistir:	watch
deslumhrado:	dazzled
treno—:	train-
convulsivamente:	convulsively
órfico:	Orphic
descorazona.:	disheartens
ablanda:	softens
niega:	denies
terquedad:	obstinacy
mí...:	my...
ejerce:	exercises
ceremonia:	ceremony
fascinación:	fascination
distancias.:	distances.
mantenerme:	keep me
Trato:	Deal
cálculos:	calculations
atraviesan:	go through
aniquilamiento:	annihilation
—intento:	-tried
imprecatorio:	imprecatory
talones:	heels
vocifera:	vociferous
mudos.:	mute.
prolongarse:	extend
contratiempo:	setback
vibrar:	vibrate
melodía.:	melody.
cortados:	cut
trinos:	trills
ritmo;:	rhythm;
aullidos;:	howls;
prolongados:	prolonged
guturales:	guttural
portamentos:	behaviors
apremiar.:	press.
gime;:	moans;
responden.:	respondents.
alternan.:	they alternate.
destemplada.:	untemplated.
colérica:	choleric
mediano:	medium
vientre.:	belly.
ensalmador;:	salting agent;
cadáver.:	corpse.
imita:	imitate
Palabra.:	Word.
colmo.:	full.
esperan:	wait
preparador:	preparer
ahuyentar:	drive away
—único:	-single
gravilla:	gravel
calabaza:	pumpkin
sacudir:	shake
mordido:	bitten
amasijo:	I knead
correr.:	run.
echan:	they cast
Dioses...:	Gods...
vasija:	vessel
reverencia:	reverence
esbozo:	outline
trepadores:	climbers
Viendo:	Seeing
pronunciara:	will pronounce
tiempo»:	time"
«solitaria:	«lonely
Mayores.:	Seniors.
divinidad:	divinity
cobrando:	charging
dados:	data
Niños:	Children
Objeto.:	Object.
naciera:	was born
modelaron:	model kit
abultado:	bulky
prólogo:	prologue
religiones.:	religions.
Dios::	God:
blanda.:	mix.
convexa:	convex
98
:	98
ombligo:	belly button
asas:	basic
endurecida:	hardened
yacen:	lie
—cunas:	—cribs
rodean...:	surround...
lamedores:	lickers
tragadores:	swallowers
Nada.:	Nothing.
entes:	loved ones
bestia.:	beast.
carroñas:	carrion
disputen:	they dispute
autorizada:	authorized
predilecta:	favorite
erigidos:	erected
existir:	exist
eréctil:	erectile
escalafones:	ladders
dueña:	owner
sarcástico—:	sarcastic-
«Cautivos:	«Captives
espanto.:	amazement.
producen:	produce
colmillos.:	fangs.
metiéndose:	getting into
servil:	servile
sonríen:	they smile
arrugados:	wrinkled
enanos:	dwarves
nacido;:	born;
vagido:	loved ones
vivientes:	living
fetos:	fetuses
conocido::	acquaintance:
erguirse:	straighten
roídos:	gnawed
hedionda:	hideous
gesticulación.:	gesticulation.
comprendiendo:	understanding
zorros:	foxes
misma.:	same.
amasar:	knead
lombrices:	worms
escarban:	dig
liendres:	nits
avispa:	wasp
pelado:	naked
entremos:	let's enter
aislan:	isolate
colgándose:	hanging around
simios:	apes
disputar:	dispute
corazones:	hearts
sembrar;:	sow;
semilla;:	seed;
valerse:	valese
saberlo:	know it
pudor:	modesty
felinos;:	felines;
ovillan:	at the door
estiran:	they stretch
hinchados;:	swollen;
flaccidas:	flabby
mí;:	my;
edades.:	ages.
tenebroso:	dark
edades—:	ages—
más»:	further"
líticos:	lithics
industrias:	industries
paleolítico:	paleolithic
convivimos:	we coexist
compases:	compasses
retrocediendo:	going back
revés:	reverse
cabe:	fits
elaboración:	elaboration
mañanas:	mornings
97
:	97
lapsos:	lapses
percibo:	I perceive
llevadas:	carried
andantes:	walking
—tiempos:	-time
sucedieran:	would happen
breves:	brief
considerablemente:	considerably
ensanchar:	widen
asombroso.:	amazing.
poseer:	possess
importancia—.:	importance-.
suponer:	suppose
dejarme:	leave me
delicado:	delicate
defiende:	defend
etapas:	stages
marcaron:	they marked
vivió:	lived
pasado.:	past.
desmemoriada:	forgetful
Agarra:	Grab
Labán.:	Laban.
Raquel:	Rachel
invocadas:	invoked
«costumbres:	"traditions
pudorosas:	shame
inequívocas:	unequivocal
emplea:	employs
alude:	alludes
definidora:	defining
proféticos.:	prophetic.
restando:	staying
sustituyen:	replace
Biblia:	The Bible
traductores:	translators
Tiene:	Has
contrato:	contract
situaciones:	situations
definición:	definition
solidez:	solidity
posesivo:	posesive
buscaba»...:	I was looking for...
durmiendo;:	sleeping;
capacidad:	ability
rebasan:	exceed
mecanismo:	mechanism
grandes»:	big»
«cosas:	"things
regido:	governed
analizando:	analyzing
cuerpo»:	body"
molde:	mould
ande:	Spirit
alumbra:	lights up
pensó:	thought
'el:	'he
cruzado:	crossed
plenitud:	fullness
propicio:	propitious
prestigioso:	prestigious
remotas.:	remote.
cercanas:	nearby
inquietarse:	worry
adónde:	where to
consentimiento.:	consent.
animoso:	game
desaliento:	discouragement
proseguiremos:	we will continue
estambres:	stamens
crujido:	crunch
colgadizo:	hanging
dormirme:	fall asleep
ello—:	it-
—estoy:	-I'm
imaginada:	imagined
vislumbre:	glimpse
revelada:	revealed
solitarios:	lonely
selvático:	wild
esclavos;:	slaves;
cimarrones:	maroons
hallazgos:	findings
Hablan:	They talk
pudiese:	could
Conozco:	Know
96
:	96
diligencia:	diligence
encenderlo:	turn it on
incapaces:	incapable
seríamos:	we would be
apagara:	will turn off
abanican:	fan
Historia.:	History.
estadía—:	stay-
—metecos:	—metics
dardo:	dart
espina:	thorn
anzuelo:	hook
rascador:	scraper
usan:	they use
inventan:	invent
alimentos:	food
dictan:	dictate
Paleolítica.:	Paleolithic.
bramar:	bellow
lloró:	cry
hueca:	hollow
caña:	cane
soplar:	blow
errar:	err
cansado:	tired
—fechas:	—dates
tornaron:	they returned
Natividad:	Nativity
borróse:	blurry
Graal:	Grail
Perdió:	lost
números.:	numbers.
lunas.:	remedy.
rellenando:	filling
borraban:	they erased
destranscurrían:	they passed away
vaciaban:	they emptied
guarismos.:	figures.
Medioevo.:	Middle Ages.
concluido:	concluded
Grafías.:	Graphics.
Dómino:	Lord
Benedicamos:	Let us bless
líe:	place
espacio...:	space...
estupefaciente:	narcotic
vislumbro:	glimpse
aspiro.:	I aspire.
recuperación:	recovery
testimonio:	testimony
aliviaban:	relieved
emplastos:	plasters
calles;:	streets;
baldados:	waste
asado.:	roast.
borracheras:	drunkenness
armar:	arms
gallos:	roosters
preferir:	prefer
cinturón:	belt
prendido:	on
claveteados.:	nailed
portones:	gates
cocinas:	kitchens
cuadros:	paintings
especias:	spices
desmedida:	excessive
compartido:	shared
chamuscadas:	singed
lechoncillos:	piglets
trinchado:	carved
museos;:	museums;
jocunda:	funny
servicio:	service
moza:	girl
catar:	Qatar
burgueses:	bourgeois
convivido:	lived together
bendición:	blessing
piden:	they ask
orgullosos:	proud
patriarcas:	patriarchs
—medievales:	—medieval
medievales:	medieval
reverenciar:	bow
trascendentales:	transcendental
alargamiento:	elongation
prenda:	garment
calendario:	calendar
pertenecer:	belong
Puede:	Can
temprana:	early
asombrosa::	amazing:
percato:	notice
recientemente.:	recently.
perduran:	they endure
fielmente:	faithfully
Francia:	France
paseos:	walks
95
:	95
Medievales:	Medieval
sacrificios.:	sacrifices.
holocausto:	holocaust
parecidos:	similar
usaban:	they used
elegida:	chosen
lanzas:	spears
románica:	Romanesque
basamento:	base
sangrante:	bleeding
edificar:	build
románico:	Romanesque
tomadas:	sockets
enlistados:	listed
Descubrimiento:	Discovery
renacentista:	Renaissance
entrado:	entered
esfuman:	vanish
diluyen:	dilute
restan:	remain
cierto.:	TRUE.
bonanza.:	see them.
reprendió:	rebuked
levantándose:	getting up
teméis:	topical
¿Por:	By
perecemos;:	we perish;
sálvanos:	scarfed
diciendo::	saying:
despertaron:	they woke up
discípulos:	disciples
dormía:	I slept
mas:	but
ondas;:	waves;
cubría:	covered
monje:	monk
azotadas:	spanked
tiempo—.:	time-.
Entrada:	Prohibited
miserere:	to pity
Dómine:	Lord
nostri:	our
Miserere:	To pity
savias.:	swordfish.
entres:	come in
morrión:	morion
donadores:	donors
orando:	praying
curtidos:	likes
rancio:	rancid
Contratación:	Hiring
algebrista:	algebraist
labriego:	laborer
renegridos:	blackened
flacos:	skinny
arrodillados:	kneeling
Hombres:	Men
Oeste:	West
plantan:	the plant
arribados:	arrived
Descubridores:	Discoverers
retrocedido:	regressed
lejanías.:	distances.
escucharon:	they listened
diferencia:	difference
deslumhra:	dazzles
figurarme:	figure
follajes:	foliage
pesaban:	they weighed
Troncos:	Trunks
Sanctus:	Saint
triunfantes:	triumphant
entonados:	toned
himnos:	hymns
heroica:	heroic
talados:	felled
hermandades:	brotherhoods
cristiandad:	Christendom
brotadas:	sprouted
seculares:	secular
inmutables:	immutable
Aquellas:	Those
garganta.:	throat.
sequedad:	dryness
Amén.:	Amen.
Sancti.:	Saints
Spiritus:	Spirit
Filie:	daughter
Patris:	Father's
nomine:	by name
Luego::	Then:
miedo.»:	fear."
tuviste:	you had
estabas:	you were
«Recuerda:	"Remember
áspero::	rough:
añadió:	he added
apelando:	appealing
mí.»:	my."
hazlo:	do it
quieres:	want
indiferente.:	indifferent.
vieran:	they would see
bautismo;:	baptism;
rehusan:	they refuse
crios.:	belt
chillidos:	shrieking
acallaban:	they silenced
colmillos—.:	fangs.
collares:	necklaces
—todo:	—all
respetuosa:	respectful
Aldea:	Village
mascullando:	masculando
iconos:	icons
94
:	94
prometida:	betrothed
interrogué:	questioned
Sabiendo:	knowing
sobrecogedor.:	startling.
rituales.:	rituals.
Purificador:	Purifier
Ara;:	We buy;
Hostia:	Guests
disponerlos:	arrange them
mangas:	sleeves
frotaba:	rubbed
mellados—:	dented—
—algunos:	-some
maletín:	briefcase
plantó:	planted
amarillas.:	yellow.
rebosantes:	overflowing
grosores:	thicknesses
remendado:	patched
dispuesto:	willing
gorjeaban.:	gurgle
corro:	I run
danzante:	dancing
aldea.:	village.
faenas:	chores
majestad:	majesty
manifestándose:	manifesting
madurado:	matured
durmiente:	sleeping
desperezo:	I stretch
transcurso:	course
liberó:	released
Permanecí:	I stayed
sopesando:	weighing
aboliendo:	abolished
ligado:	connected
inscrito:	enrolled
magnífica—:	magnificent—
—pieza:	-part
cumplido.:	compliment.
trofeos:	trophies
orgulloso:	proud
justos:	fair
cumplida.:	fulfilled.
ciclo:	cycle
entraba:	came in
creadas:	created
concluir:	conclude
primera.:	first.
describiera:	describe
representada:	represented
costados:	sides
encajadas:	fitted
sepultura:	grave
siniestro:	sinister
reviste:	magazines
dotada:	gifted
pescadores:	fishermen
botuto:	boot
adornos:	ornaments
atravesada:	crossed
empuñadura:	handle
recorrido:	route
reliquia:	relic
peregrino:	pilgrim
anafre:	ref
misión.:	mission.
Acababa:	it was over
exclamaciones.:	exclamations.
jubilosas:	jubilant
93
:	93
desempeñado:	performed
eficientes.:	efficient.
tobillos.:	ankles.
sólidos:	solids
ásperos;:	rough;
asir:	captive
utilidad.:	utility.
cabelleras.:	hair
narices:	nose
aguileño:	aquiline
nobleza:	nobility
alzado.:	raised.
enmarcaban:	they framed
maternidad:	maternity
remos;:	oars;
esculpidos:	carved
dorsales:	dorsal
potentes:	potent
movían:	they moved
ejercitaban:	they exercised
autoridad:	authority
propiciados:	propitiated
revelaban:	they revealed
maderamen:	wood
recubriendo:	covering
técnica:	technique
embocaba:	holed
coreógrafo:	choreographer
flechaba:	arrowed
precisión:	precision
soberana:	sovereign
primitivismo.:	primitivism.
vestirlos:	dress them
esenciales:	essential
desconocían:	they did not know
evidencia:	evidence
salvaje.:	wild.
cultura.:	culture.
resultaban:	they turned out
considerándolos:	considering them
fantasiosos:	fanciful
primordiales.:	primordial.
conocidos.:	acquaintances.
emanación:	emanation
tez.:	quickly.
generaciones:	generations
contribuido:	contributed
recobraba:	recovered
restregar:	scrub
arrodillarse:	kneel
lavaba:	washed
lechosos:	milky
tubérculos:	tubers
machacaban:	they crushed
píe:	foot
tejían.:	they wove
crios:	belt
agallas.:	guts.
ensartados:	skewered
anaranjado:	orange
peonías.:	peonies.
pulsera:	bracelet
mostrándome:	showing me
inseguras:	insecure
orillaban:	they bordered
Varias:	Several
estatura.:	stature.
resigné:	resigned
rebotes:	rebounds
descolgaban:	they picked up
divisaban:	they saw
ensombramiento:	shadowing
definían:	they defined
evanescencias:	evanescence
encajado:	fitted
reflejos:	highlights
razonar:	reason
pasmado:	stunned
celebración:	celebration
graderíos:	grades
tronos:	thrones
—morada:	-household
tuberías:	pipes
flanqueadas:	flanked
terrazas:	terraces
vertiginosas:	vertiginous
proporciones:	proportions
granito.:	granite.
hulla.:	corpse.
irisaciones:	iridescence
92
:	92
sombrías:	gloomy
cónico:	conical
peñón:	crag
montada:	mounted
arbotantes:	arbutants
ábside:	apse
Formas::	Shapes:
almenas:	battlements
obsidiana:	obsidian
dominadas:	dominated
explanadas:	esplanades
mausoleos:	mausoleums
ciclópeas:	cyclopean
espaciadas—:	spaced—
múltiples:	multiple
edificaciones:	buildings
titánica:	titanic
proporciones.:	proportions.
analogía:	analogy
contemplando.:	contemplating.
tentaciones:	temptations
ilustradores:	illustrators
alucinados:	hallucinated
fabulosos.:	fabulous
plomada:	plumb
tiradas:	shots
verticales:	vertical
flaneos:	flannels
macizas:	solid
asombro.:	astonishment.
librarme:	free me
exclamaciones:	exclamations
estupefacto:	thunderstruck
adolorido:	sore
recordaron:	they remembered
secar:	dry
puestas:	set
rojiviolados:	red-violet
aspadas:	swords
pájaros.:	birds.
canutos:	canutes
aspiraban:	they aspired
dispensadora:	dispenser
sabría:	would know
servían:	served
paletas:	pallets
taparas:	tapar
envenenados:	poisoned
dardos:	darts
carcajes:	quivers
cerbatanas:	blowguns
nalgas.:	buttocks.
cordón:	cord
amasando:	kneading
probaba:	tried
estómago:	stomach
resfrío:	cold
agotamiento:	exhaustion
indios;:	Indians;
caminata:	hike
desembarco:	landing
Recordé:	I remembered
leña.:	firewood.
Olía:	Oil
delgada.:	slim.
paja:	straw
acostado:	lying down
largamente:	widely
bebí:	I drank
cántaro:	pitcher
agarré:	grip
Segunda:	Second
un::	and:
saberme:	know me
varadero:	slipway
descansa:	rest
Agotado:	Exhausted
Desarrugando:	Unwrinkling
orillas.:	shores.
bordas.:	edges.
afincando:	settling
pararse:	stop
91
:	91
inacabable.:	unending
Prosigue:	Continue
remos.:	oars.
defendiéndonos:	defending ourselves
arroje:	throw
cinturones:	belts
entereza.:	fortitude.
resguarda:	protects
reguardando:	looking at
dirige:	directs
Acrece:	increases
llover.:	rain.
quilla.:	keel.
chillan:	they scream
torturadas:	tortured
vuelco:	overturn
sesgándonos:	biasing us
redondas:	round
montando:	riding
picando:	stinging
equilibrio:	balance
Dominando:	Dominating
olvidarlo:	forget it
circunda.:	surrounds.
sobreponerme:	get over
Perdida:	Lost
zarandea:	you are
tumulto:	riot
salvación:	salvation
mostrarme:	show me
repentino:	sudden
aerolitos:	Aerosol
bullentes:	bubbling
marañas:	tangles
tenebrosa:	dark
deslindada:	delimited
parpadeante:	flickering
reaparecidos.:	reappeared.
hunden:	the dog
desprende:	detaches
alumbrar:	light
seguimiento:	follow-up
enciende:	turn on
tormenta.:	storm.
bramante:	longing
sueltan:	they release
turbamulta:	a lot of trouble
bastón.:	cane.
arrumbando:	breaking in
afianzado:	entrenched
Tomando:	Taking
peligrosamente:	dangerously
llevándole:	taking him
prenderse:	catch
remolinos:	swirls
atormentado:	tormented
distintos.:	distinct.
minero.:	miner.
reanudarse:	resume
bastonazos:	caning
reaparece:	reappears
huida.:	flight.
arrieros:	muleteers
misionera:	missionary
digo.:	I say.
fechas»:	dates»
revés.:	reverse.
andarse:	walk away
refiere:	refers
asustando:	scaring
estática:	static
Doctora:	Doctor
pirata:	pirate
90
:	90
degollados:	beheaded
paraguayas:	paraguayan
saetas:	arrows
Lizardi:	Lizard
torturado:	tortured
beato:	blessed
Marañón;:	Cashew;
despedazados:	torn to pieces
desconocida;:	unknown;
contarme:	tell me
otros.»:	others."
«Para:	"To
abrupto::	abrupt:
templo.:	temple.
indignos:	unworthy
sacerdotes:	priests
apoyar:	support
serle:	be him
apostolado:	apostleship
ermitaño:	hermit
tarado:	crazy
ocioso:	idle
urbano:	urban
clero:	clergy
—pienso:	-I think
exclama:	exclaims
caballería»:	chivalry"
infantería:	infantry
rivalidad:	rivalry
pulpito.:	pulpit.
tenores:	tenors
nunciaturas:	announcements
rumiantes:	ruminants
indulgencias:	indulgences
vendedores:	sellers
califica:	qualify
mundanos:	worldly
párrocos:	parish priests
acremente:	add
ara:	We buy
creó.»:	believe."
honrar:	honor
sirvan:	serve
materias:	materials
hermosas:	beautiful
—responde:	—replies
justo:	fair
«Porque:	"Why
custodias:	the guards
pedrería:	rhinestones
relumbran:	they shine
ofenderse.:	be offended.
fabuloso:	fabulous
Oigo:	I hear
precioso.:	precious.
cegar:	blind
llamamos:	we call
diamantes.:	diamonds.
acaudalar:	affluent
alejó:	moved away
desentumecer:	loosen up
boscosa:	wooded
Aprovechándose:	Taking advantage
martes):	mars)
confluencias.:	confluences
presidieran:	in the presidency
inmemoriales:	immemorial
edificadas:	built
enlazadas:	linked
alfarero.:	potter.
redondearse:	round off
monumentales:	monumental
desgastado:	worn out
Génesis;:	Genesis;
amasan:	goals
nubes::	clouds:
descubría:	discovered
asombroso:	amazing
indecencias:	indecencies
travesuras:	antics
escandalizaban:	scandalized
monos:	monkeys
alegres:	happy
barroca:	baroque
simulacros:	drills
barajarse:	shuffle
milagro.:	miracle.
colibrí:	hummingbird
vibración:	vibration
universo:	universe
frágil:	fragile
pescador:	fisherman
blancas.:	white.
interrogación:	question
inventaban:	invented
89
:	89
plumajes.:	plumages.
identidad:	identity
celestemente:	heavenly
azogue:	quicksilver
invirtiendo:	investing
ardiente.:	burning.
amarillos:	yellow
macizos:	solid
jalonaban:	jalonando
edelweis:	edelweiss
inalcanzable:	unattainable
irreal:	unreal
orquídea:	orchid
esperma:	sperm
tulipán:	tulip
cactáceas:	cacti
almíbares:	syrups
rociados:	sprinkled
insectívoras:	insectivorous
vulvas:	vulva
hediondos:	hideous
sudorosos:	sweaty
bulbos:	bulbs
mentidas:	lies
frutos;:	fruits;
decrepitud.:	decrepit
mentidos:	lies
insectos.:	insects.
transformara:	will transform
segundos:	seconds
Bastaba:	It was enough
vaharadas:	Vahardas
logradas:	achieved
linazas.:	linseeds.
poso:	the post office
fulminaba:	fulminated
eléctrico:	electric
zanahoria:	carrot
crisálida-ciempiés:	chrysalis-centipede
castaña-erizo:	chestnut-hedgehog
lagarto-cohombro:	cucumber-lizard
metamorfosis.:	metamorphosis.
estratagema:	stratagem
semblante;:	countenance;
entero.:	whole.
salpicaduras:	splashes
simulación:	simulation
intenso:	intense
estriado:	fluted
lapizlázuli:	lapis lazuli
camaleón:	chameleon
falsedad:	falsehood
espolvoreos:	sprinkles
salmuera:	brine
firme::	firm:
fingiéndose:	pretending
escondiendo:	hiding
apretaban:	they squeezed
acuáticas:	aquatic
anillas:	rings
ananá:	pineapple
escamas:	scales
preciosas:	precious
nervaduras:	ribbing
escaramujos;:	rose hips;
podridos:	rotten
acechaban:	stalked
caimanes:	alligators
entredicho.:	interdicted
verdades:	truths
creándose:	being created
mimetismo:	mimicry
hormigas.:	ants.
melosa:	honeyed
acudían:	they came
cráteres:	craters
nidos:	nida
destrozando:	destroying
arados:	plows
intrincadas:	intricate
arcos.:	bows.
disparaban:	they shot
reventar:	burst
tirando:	taking
desgajados:	torn apart
aplastados:	crushed
Cien:	Hundred
quemar:	burn
carbón:	coal
rajado:	riven
astillas:	splinters
prehistoria:	prehistory
coloso:	colossus
deleznable:	despicable
derribarlo:	knock it down
tempestades:	storms
Chorreado:	dripped
88
:	88
cristalizaciones.:	crystallizations.
equilibrios:	balances
simetrías:	symmetries
encanecían:	small
apagaba:	turned off
secaba:	dried
lacerados.:	lacerated
suspendidos:	suspended
irreales:	unreal
aéreos:	aerial
boscajes:	forests
despejado:	clear
espigadas:	spiked
rastreante:	tracker
Arboles:	Trees
jamás.:	never.
señeramente:	sensibly
batalla:	battle
diversas:	miscellaneous
fases:	phases
savia:	sap
asomar:	show
lograban:	they achieved
despunte:	blunt
escuálidas:	scrawny
estiramiento:	stretch
desmedido:	excessive
ascender:	ascend
treparse:	climb up
empeñadas:	pawned
violentas:	violent
pinceladas:	brush strokes
graznante:	beautifying
alborozo:	joy
empinada:	steep
malhumorado:	moody
giba:	movement
redondeaba:	rounded
hundiendo:	sinking
empinadas:	steep
Centenares:	Hundreds
trompa.:	trunk.
refrescar:	refresh
matapalos:	lazy
entretejida:	Entretejida
feraz:	ferocious
sarmientos:	shoots
anónimos:	anonymous
sujetos:	subjects
abismada.:	astonished.
emergían:	emerged
blanquecinos:	whitish
antiquísimas:	ancient
alargaban:	they lengthened
ancladas:	anchored
hundidas:	sunken
retorcidos:	twisted
porciones:	portions
verdadera.:	true.
internaba:	interned
alusiones:	allusions
maliciosas:	malicious
coplas:	couplets
remediar.:	remedy.
poderlo:	power it
lloraba:	I cried
canturreando:	humming
fase:	phase
excusarme:	excuse me
malévolo.:	malicious.
deslinde:	unravel
despeje:	pour
rugidos:	roars
madrugada:	dawn
ancestros:	ancestors
atávico:	atavistic
entrañado:	entangled
renueva:	renew
arboledas.:	groves.
infinitas:	infinite
liberado:	released
despejado.:	clear.
augurar:	augur
grisallas:	gray
insinúa:	hints
neblinas:	mists
exhala:	exhale
creación.:	creation.
usufructuario:	usufructuary
—belleza:	-beauty
87
:	87
gozada:	cumshot
percibida:	perceived
físicamente:	physically
Ríos:	Rivers
lavarme:	wash
temores:	fears
bían:	bian
Primera:	First
miedo—:	fear-
clamar:	cry
rodeaban:	surrounded
venció:	expired
extenuado.:	exhausted.
febril.:	febrile.
asustado:	scared
hoyo.:	hole.
cencerros:	cowbells
agitaban:	they agitated
relinchaban:	Ralinchaban
aullaban:	lobby
crujían:	creaked
martillaban:	they hammered
zambullían:	dived
pegadas:	footprints
pasaban:	they passed
bajaban:	they went down
subían:	they went up
silbidos:	whistles
borborigmos:	borborygmi
pavo:	of them
tremulantes:	trembling
harmónicas:	harmonics
lengüetas:	reeds
mordían:	they bit
frondas.:	fronds.
respondieron:	they responded
distintamente:	distinctly
grotesco:	grotesque
embocadura:	mouthpiece
deslizamientos.:	slides.
estremecían:	they shuddered
invadió:	invaded
croar:	croak
aisló:	isolated
somero:	summer
campamento:	camp
organizado:	organized
hubimos:	we had
prematuro:	premature
Huí:	I fled
gimiera:	moaned
vez—:	time-
afinación:	tuning
metían:	they put
putrefactas:	rotten
horrenda::	horrible:
atracado:	moored
llamó:	called
amarilla:	yellow
moría:	died
inverno:	winter
asoleamiento:	sunning
ceroso:	waxy
savias;:	swordfish?
escupitajos:	spit
recibido:	received
camisas:	shirts
chupar.:	to suck.
antenas:	antennas
élitros:	elytra
bajas.:	lows.
desprendían:	they shed
frialdad.:	coldness.
aliviarme:	relieve me
frescor.:	freshness.
sobresalto:	shock
llegarían:	would arrive
anofeles:	helpless
zancudos:	mosquitoes
pegajosa:	sticky
cabellos;:	hair;
86
:	86
prendida:	on
agravaba:	aggravated
suficiente.:	enough.
respirar:	breathe
trasmundos:	transworlds
indefinible:	indefinable
tranquilos:	calm
amenazaba.:	threatened.
Empezaba:	It started
esloras.:	lengths.
secreta.:	secret
situarme:	situate myself
atolondrarme:	offer me
angustiosa.:	distressing
indeciblemente:	unspeakably
extravío:	loss
trastorno:	disorder
inexistentes.:	non-existent.
ilusorios:	illusory
conseguidos:	achieved
luminosos:	luminous
venía:	permission
reflejo.:	reflection.
mareo:	dizziness
desorientación:	disorientation
nieves::	snow:
montañeses:	mountaineers
fenómeno:	freak
plantas.:	plants.
pantanos:	swamps
musgo:	moss
teñía:	had
vibrátil:	it vibrates
cínifes:	cynics
diminutos:	tiny
pulgas:	fleas
líquido::	liquid:
creados:	created
caminaban:	they walked
superficie:	surface
aceitosa:	oily
agriamente:	agrily
olían:	the oil
fermentación:	fermentation
rampante:	rampant
adivinaba:	guessed
liendres—.:	nits.
levantados:	raised
—remolinos:	—swirls
podredumbres:	rotten
turbias:	cloudy
estela:	wake
denunciaban:	denounced
bofetadas:	slaps
ondulaciones:	ripples
súbitas:	sudden
Chasquidos:	Clicks
culebras:	snakes
enrevesamiento:	entanglement
cochambroso:	dumpy
—allí:	-over there
sorda:	deaf
gasas:	gauze
holoturia.:	holothuria.
estancamiento:	stagnation
tragante:	swallow
alejarse:	move away
aletazo:	flap
endurecidas:	hardened
burbujas:	bubbles
racimos:	clusters
Flotaban:	They floated
encubrimiento.:	concealment.
parda.:	curtain
desplome:	collapse
promovió:	promoted
enroñaba:	enroñado
fetidez:	smelly
velludas:	hairy
frutos:	fruits
hebras:	strands
—pesado:	-heavy
errante:	wandering
hollín:	soot
garrotazo:	clubbing
madero:	log
anegada.:	flooded
retorcidas.:	twisted
duramente:	hard
rasparon:	scraped
deslizarse:	slide
túnel:	tunnel
introdujo:	introduced
85
:	85
ahí.:	there.
estrecho:	narrow
multiplicaba:	multiplied
repetirse:	repeat
diseño:	design
escamoso.:	scaly.
demás::	others:
igual:	equal
«¡Ahí:	"There
Adelantado::	Advanced:
Adormecido:	Asleep
estemos:	we are
acuciosa:	diligent
hosca:	Hoske
aproximando:	approaching
plomada.:	plumb.
teodolito:	theodolite
prolonga:	prolong
difumina:	blur
grieta.:	crack.
aparente:	apparent
empalizada:	palisade
inabordable:	unaffordable
manchas:	stains
cedido:	ceded
bambusales:	bamboo
fraguando.:	forging
autenticidad:	authenticity
visos:	all
reparo:	repair
rige:	rich
bautizo:	christening
indios.»:	Indians."
«Eramos:	«We were
naturalmente::	naturally:
narrar:	narrate
malicia:	malice
condiciones:	conditions
distinción:	distinction
saqueo:	pillage
trompeta:	trumpet
cargos:	charges
otorgo:	I grant
astrólogo.:	astrologer.
Codro:	Cod
Micer:	mic
entrada.:	Prohibited.
quedamos:	we stay
pediremos:	we will ask
maravillosas:	wonderful
divierto:	I have fun
monotonía:	monotony
—
sustituye:	—
replaces
ondulación:	undulation
—tiesura:	—judiciary
mediana:	median
asombrarnos:	amaze us
diversidad:	diversity
conjugan:	conjugate
promontorios:	headlands
lunes):	Monday)
guardianes.:	guardians.
CUARTO:	ROOM
84
:	84
iluminarán:	will illuminate
rayo—:	ray-
ignoraremos:	we will ignore
proa.:	bow.
olfatea:	sniff
«¡Vamos:	«¡Come on
despedimos:	we say goodbye
embarcaciones.:	boats.
verano.:	summer.
contrariada:	upset
nuevos.:	new.
creemos:	we believe
asomamos:	we peek
saciada:	satiated
compartida:	shared
creada.:	created.
acabara:	it was over
oírla:	hear it
ensalmado:	salted
modeladas:	modeled
tornar:	become
tuvieran:	had
repitiéndolo:	repeating it
daremos:	we will give
imprevisibles—:	unpredictable—
apodos:	nicknames
imaginados:	imagined
sexos:	sexes
noches.:	nights.
prohibidas:	prohibited
íntimas:	intimate
surgiendo:	arising
fragua:	forge
aprendizaje:	learning
acoplamientos.:	couplings.
determinar:	determine
actitudes:	attitudes
tanteos:	scores
maravillosos:	wonderful
fijando:	fixing
eligiendo:	choosing
acomodo.:	arrangement.
ajuste;:	adjustment;
miembros:	members
cuerpos.:	bodies.
sintaxis:	syntax
haciéndonos:	making us
premuras:	haste
enmendamos:	we amend
exhaladoras:	exhalers
ordenar:	order
juntar:	to bring together
conducidas:	driven
descienden:	they descend
vaciados—:	emptied—
—dos:	-of the
alborotosamente.:	rowdily.
trancos:	jerks
Eumeo...:	Eumeus...
porquerizo:	swineherd
transfigurado:	transfigured
filete:	steak
mediterráneas:	Mediterranean
rociarlas:	spray them
servirlas:	serve them
grasa;:	fat;
untarlas:	spread them
ensartar:	Ancestor
Odisea.:	Odyssey.
explicarme:	explain to me
propiciatorio:	propitiatory
cerdas:	intelligent
arcaico.:	archaic.
salvajes.:	wild.
atribuirse:	attribute
desaforado:	unbridled
atiza:	he has run away
lomos:	loins
menudos:	giblets
descuartizamiento;:	quartering;
escaldadura:	scald
hoguera;:	bonfire;
habitualmente:	usually
alimenta:	feed
diluido:	diluted
manioco:	cassava
hartura:	take
cazadores:	hunters
uniendo:	uniting
¡Una:	A
«¡Una:	"A
tamaño.:	size.
salvaje:	wild
cerdo:	pig
83
:	83
pezuña:	hoof
Zevs:	Zeus
destino.»:	destination."
asigna:	assigns
desdichas:	misfortunes
agravan:	aggravate
tontería:	nuisance
dioses.:	gods.
enjuician:	prosecute
mortales:	mortal
Escuchad:	listen
clama::	cries:
lamentarse:	lament
Vuelve:	Comes back
Poseidón.:	Poseidon.
—afirma—:	—states—
abruptos:	abrupt
construirá:	will build
encuentre:	find
antepasados.:	forefathers.
cargar:	carry
preciosos:	precious
metales:	metals
agarró:	grab
abrojos.:	caltrops.
cardos:	thistles
divisó:	spotted
suyos::	his:
múrices:	murices
cabras.:	goats.
peristilos:	peristalsis
tumbas:	graves
murallas:	walls
mediterráneo:	Mediterranean
conoce.:	know
campamentos.:	camps.
leyeron:	they read
cíclope:	Cyclops
entortado:	bent
Itaca.:	Ithaca.
sirenas:	mermaids
enemigo:	enemy
visitador:	visitor
afinidad:	affinity
trágicos:	tragic
escuelita:	little school
sustituye:	replaces
anguloso:	angular
fragmentos:	fragments
versión:	version
separarse:	separate
hule:	cave
forrada:	lined
bilingüe:	bilingual
edición:	edition
modesta:	modest
partes::	parts:
sabe.:	he knows.
prospección:	prospecting
emprender:	undertake
burlado:	mocked
agotado:	exhausted
Desvío:	Detour
disimulos.:	dissimulations.
pueriles:	childish
mujer»:	women"
formaliza:	formalize
cuándo:	when
marcada:	marked
vajilla:	crockery
limpiarla:	clean it
gesto.:	gesture.
hombre::	man:
enorgullecerme:	proud
secándome:	drying myself
ordeñando:	milking
trayéndome:	trayendome
cuidados:	care
comprometido:	committed
remordida:	remorse
interrogante:	question mark
82
:	82
melancólico:	melancholy
palmada:	slap
instalado:	installed
Jamás:	Never
desaparecido:	missing
fracaso.:	failure.
agobiar:	overwhelm
física:	physical
deploro:	I deplore
adentros:	inside
aliviarse:	relieve
deber.:	duty.
cumplo:	I fulfill
seguirnos:	follow us
conciencia::	awareness:
adormecimiento:	numbness
donación:	donation
liberalidad:	liberality
leznas.:	legz
comercio:	trade
billetes:	tickets
quedándome:	staying
necesarios:	necessary
tratamientos:	treatments
instale:	install
traslados:	transfers
pague:	pay
atienda:	attend
embarcación.:	vessel.
envuelta:	wrapped
metido:	put
acoplamiento.:	coupling.
oponerse:	object
proceden:	proceed
insaciados:	insatiated
inseguros:	insecure
descubrirse:	be discovered
(Lunes:	(Monday
sangres:	bloods
gozosa:	joyful
acaricio:	caress
sembrado:	sown
agonía.:	agony.
conmoviera:	moved
morirse:	die
Pudiera:	could
oscuridad.:	darkness.
ritmo.:	rhythm.
imponerme:	impose
inerte:	inert
mortecino:	dead woman
encontrarse:	meet
desunidos:	disunited
delirio.:	delirium.
divagaciones:	ramblings
extravía:	misplaces
callar.:	shut up.
golpes:	blows
dispara:	shoot
¡Cochinos:	Pigs
—grita—.:	—screams—.
«¡Cochinos:	«Pigs
babeante:	drooling
crispada:	tense
gemía.:	he moaned.
Habíamos:	we had
golpe.:	blow.
desemparejándonos:	unpairing
escupe:	spit
quebrada:	ravine
acomodo:	arrangement
arqueando:	arching
acaricia:	caress
tobillos:	ankles
piernas::	legs:
batiente:	swing
esparcidas:	scattered
Yacemos:	We lie
vivir.:	live.
sellado:	sealed
cobramos:	we charge
jadeantes:	panting
deleitosa.:	delightful
trabazón:	interlock
vencerse:	expire
posesión.:	possession.
81
:	81
espera—:	wait-
crispación:	crispation
detenida:	detained
—más:	-further
yerbabuena.:	spearmint
albahaca:	basil
estrechaba:	narrowed
mágicos:	magical
—casi:	-almost
suspenso::	suspended:
resuello:	wheeze
azafrán.:	saffron.
sándalo:	sandalwood
alcanfor:	camphor
envolviéndonos:	involving us
crujiente:	crunchy
heno:	tonight
carnadas:	baits
cestas:	baskets
derriba:	knock down
quieta:	still
tenerla:	have it
violencias.:	violence.
irrupción:	irruption
Tanto:	Both
puta.:	out.
perra:	bitch
dudar:	dude
escupir:	spit
ofensa:	offense
inferido:	inflicted
imaginárselo:	it was imaginary
profundos.:	deep
instintos:	instincts
intención:	intention
tersura:	smoothness
firmeza:	the firm
insistencia:	insistence
pudor.:	modesty.
aldeano:	villager
conservado:	conserved
despoje:	dispossession
fingidas:	feigned
incita:	incites
probarlo:	try it
pierde:	lose
sospecho.:	I suspect.
Empezando:	Getting started
decidirla.:	decide it.
despertando:	awakening
vuela:	fly
hombro::	shoulder:
posa:	put
garrasperas.:	claws
febril:	febrile
alzarse.:	rise.
irónicamente—.:	ironically-.
—concluyó:	—he concluded
blándula:	fool
vágula:	the vagus
andanzas.:	wanderings.
imposible.:	impossible.
acceso:	access
quedaría:	would remain
débil:	weak
forzarla:	force her
comodidad::	comfort:
aguardarme:	wait for me
conduciría:	would drive
inconveniente:	inconvenient
dicendo:	saying
providencial:	providential
tortura:	torture
Adivinando:	Guessing
aborrecía.:	hated
escolta:	listen
tonta:	old
preciosa:	lovely
equivalía:	was equivalent
implicaba:	implied
palúdica:	malaria
derribada:	knocked down
avisado:	warned
reconocerlo:	recognize it
esperó:	wait
zamba:	fraud
muerta:	dead
violada:	raped
ribereñas:	riparian
indigna.:	unworthy
digna:	worthy
Villano:	Villain
Fiel:	Fell
Amante:	Lover
Ejemplar:	Copy
Esposa:	Wife
Malo:	Place
pieza:	part
80
:	80
tallados:	carved
teatros:	theaters
hombría:	manhood
Faltar:	Lack
discusión.:	discussion.
insoslayables:	unavoidable
eternos:	eternal
honraban:	in honor
obligaciones:	obligations
respeto:	I respect
convivían:	they lived together
sustituido:	replaced
auténtico.:	authentic.
asestándole:	hitting him
quebrarla:	break it
afearla:	manure
cansarla:	tire her out
desarmarla:	disarm it
enfermedad.:	disease.
eligiera:	choose
insecto:	insect
maravillas:	wonders
hollábamos:	we found
rezongando:	grumbling
deslizaron:	they slipped
regiones—.:	regions.
concedía:	granted
—enfermedad:	-disease
diagnosticó:	diagnosis
autorizado:	authorized
temblores.:	tremors.
hundirse:	sink
delirando:	delirious
incorporado:	incorporated
tiritaba:	shivered
noticia::	news:
espesarse:	thicken
concluyendo:	concluding
escuchando:	listening
formuladas:	formulated
aptitud:	fitness
advertía:	warned
sofocante:	suffocating
Transcurrieron:	They passed
comportamiento:	behavior
enardecida:	enraged
enamorada:	in love
ejemplo:	example
—algo:	-something
agredido:	assaulted
confería:	conferred
violenta:	violent
adivinaban:	they guessed
Mouche.:	Fly.
repelían:	repelled
disturbios:	unrest
tácita:	tacit
semillas.:	seeds.
desgranaba:	shelled
enseñaba:	taught
caían:	they fell
agraviado:	aggrieved
regodeado:	gloated
alpargatas:	espadrilles
remendaban:	they mended
falsete.:	falsetto.
ajo:	SHE
aceite:	oil
hervía:	boiled
nerviosidad:	nervousness
cosa.:	What.
parecieran:	they seemed
fruncía:	puckered
chinchorro.:	chinchorro
desamparo:	helplessness
gemir:	moan
Dejándola:	leaving her
ruegos.:	prayers
añadidos:	added
recapacitaciones:	retraining
cambios:	changes
ternura.:	tenderness.
amistosa:	friendly
subsistir:	subsist
sentimiento—:	feeling-
asaltaban:	assaulted
—hasta:	-until
79
:	79
Apagado:	Off
extraña.:	strange
serme:	laying
prolongada:	prolonged
alabo:	those
admira:	admire
acorazado:	battleship
sentida:	felt
súplica:	appeal
suplica:	appeal
demencia.:	dementia.
agota:	exhausts
soporta:	supports
insistir:	insist
agresión;:	assault;
Herborizador.:	Herbalizer.
esparadrapos:	adhesive plasters
rubricada:	initialed
Hedionda:	Hideous
choza.:	hut.
enfurecido.:	enraged.
cerrándole:	closing him
testarudez:	stubborn
repitiendo:	repeating
gacha:	up to
sentada:	sitting
negándose:	refusing
mutismo:	mutism
ocurrido.:	occurred.
tratamos:	we treat
rodeando:	surrounding
curarla.:	cure it.
desollones.:	skinning
arañazos:	scratches
nariz.:	nose.
sangra:	bleed
dientes.:	teeth.
levanto:	I lift
bufidos:	snorts
roncos:	snoring
gruñidos:	grunts
traduce:	translate
sujetan:	hold
muerde:	bite
retuerce:	twists
agarrarla.:	grab it.
corremos:	we run
pegando:	catching
escupiendo:	spitting
estaca.:	stake.
pidiendo:	asking
empapada:	soaked
villano.:	villain.
afrentara:	will affront
sorprender:	surprise
grita.:	shouts.
extrañado:	missed
oyen:	they hear
peligrosas.:	dangerous.
albergan:	they house
pocetas:	you will start
cubre.:	covers.
costra:	crust
desprenden:	detach
infructuosa:	fruitless
desacompasando:	out of step
adivinado:	guessed
fulgor:	glow
reaviva:	revive
ilusión:	illusion
encuentro.:	meeting.
pobre:	poor
descubridor:	discoverer
fatalidad:	fatality
desesperanzas:	despair
Riqueza.:	Wealth.
milímetros:	millimeters
desvío:	detour
lateralmente:	laterally
interrogado:	interrogated
lodazal:	mud
revuelto;:	scrambled;
escarbado:	scratched
Agamenón:	Agamemnon
Regreso:	Return
78
:	78
Moisés:	Moses
mugían:	go away
fría.:	cold.
alumbraba:	illuminated
pepitas:	nuggets
sabor.:	flavor.
tentó:	tempted
alquimista.:	alchemist.
sopesábamos:	we were weighing
crecer.:	grow.
Palpábamos:	We palpated
amarillearon:	yellowed
piedrecitas:	pebbles
destapó:	uncovered
conjuro:	incantation
marcharon:	marchon
Espesura:	Thickness
tomaban:	they took
pude:	could
Desconocido—.:	A stranger-.
cercanías:	surroundings
planteada:	raised
edificaban:	they built
Parima.:	The best.
rebrillaban:	resplendent
prodigios.:	prodigies.
pararnos:	stop
infancia.:	childhood.
Formas»:	Shapes»
«Nadie:	"Nobody
Ríos.:	Rivers.
misteriosos:	mysterious
descifrar:	decipher
Emplumada:	feathered
Serpiente:	Snake
talladas:	carved
máxima.:	maximum.
alfabetos:	alphabets
castigando:	punishing
nudos:	knots
transitado:	traveled
vastos:	vast
Pacífico:	Peaceful
Descubríanse:	They discovered each other
inmortalidad:	immortality
fenecidos:	deceased
derrocados:	overthrown
—dioses:	—gods
Avenidas:	Avenues
fijas:	fixed
hallarla:	with cases
Unas:	Nails
sacerdotes-langostas.:	lobster-priests.
sacerdotes-peces:	fish-priests
representaban:	they represented
portentosas:	portentous
atracaderos:	berths
Mayas:	Mayans
Imperio:	Empire
caribes:	caribbeans
existido::	existed:
Urre.:	gold
contemplada:	contemplated
divisado:	spotted
reputado:	reputed
geógrafo:	geographer
narración:	narration
Setenta:	Seventy
Luces.:	Lights.
Siglo:	Century
pleno:	full
misioneros:	missionaries
Prodigios:	prodigies
Abogado:	Lawyer
trataba.:	tried.
embustes:	lies
difundir:	spread
77
:	77
Maligno:	Malignant
consejas:	advice
endosar:	endorse
rugiendo...:	roaring...
rabiando:	raging
murió:	died
Constantinopla:	Constantinople
exhibida:	exhibited
Arpía:	Harpy
portentos:	portents
fidedigno:	trustworthy
—según:	-according to
avestruz:	ostrich
pezuñas:	hooves
cobijarse:	shelter
venados:	deer
virtudes:	virtues
prodigiosas:	prodigious
Bezar:	Market
aceptábamos:	we accepted
alimentaban:	they fed
dormir:	sleep
anfibios:	amphibians
Bogotá:	Bogota
Ensalmo:	I praise
portentos.:	portents.
anhelantes:	longing
envolver:	involve
dejábamos:	we left
dedos.:	fingers.
yema:	bud
prodigio:	prodigy
ausentes.:	absent.
sostenerla:	support her
estatura:	stature
alabarda:	halberd
agarrados:	clinging
espadas:	swords
morriones:	morions
revuelta:	revolt
narró:	narrated
acallados:	silenced
pasábamos:	we passed
Conquistadores.:	Conquerors.
—fecha:	-date
escrita:	writing
forja:	forging
perfil::	profile:
hacha:	axe
arrimó:	arrived
Irguiéndose:	standing up
inaccesible:	inaccessible
quemado:	burned
partidas:	matches
crónicas:	chronicles
conocidas;:	known;
dardos.:	darts.
reiterado:	reiterated
sorber:	drink
monturas:	mounts
extraviarse:	stray
expediciones:	expeditions
fracaso:	failure
trágico:	tragic
tanteo:	score
tremebundo:	trembling
corrido:	run
contempló:	contemplated
Urre:	gold
Hutten:	Cabins
movedizo:	shifting
asentar:	settle
calzaron:	they shod
corceles:	steeds
cabalgando:	riding
estandartes:	banners
chivo:	billy goat
enjutos:	lean
extremeños:	Extremadurans
rizadas:	curly
rubios:	blondes
alemanes:	germans
difuntos.:	deceased.
tenedores:	forks
herbolarios:	herbalists
algebristas:	algebraist
nigromante:	necromancer
escoltados:	escorted
capellanes:	chaplains
Espira:	Turn
Belalcázar:	Belalcazar
escaupiles:	escapiles
cotas:	quotas
calentar:	heat
surgen:	arise
aventureros:	adventurers
prodigiosos:	prodigious
invocar:	invoke
españoles:	spanish
ríos.»:	rivers."
arrojada:	bold
paridora:	birther
"la:	"the
llamara:	will call
hallamos.:	we find
planeta—:	planet-
explorada:	exploited
empavesadas:	buntings
76
:	76
alquimia:	alchemy
desconocemos:	we don't know
—arguye:	—argues
«Luego:	"Then
objeta:	objects
«Aluviones»:	«Alluvium»
lodos:	sludge
abarca:	encompasses
realidad.:	reality.
recolector:	collector
lumbre.:	fire.
ramillas:	twigs
cazurra:	cazura
espejismo:	mirage
refiere.:	refers.
estudiado:	studied
ser—:	to be-
—narrador:	-narrator
narrador:	narrator
Tesoros.:	Treasures.
agrada:	like
guardián:	guardian
gnomo:	gnome
carnosos:	fleshy
pecas:	parts
cortas:	short
calva:	bald
cauces.:	channels.
encoge:	shrink
exhausta.:	exhausted
desatan:	untie
Prendido:	On
cayéndose.:	falling
graznando:	thanking
grillos.:	irons.
gozamos:	we enjoy
compartimos:	we share
sosiego:	quiet
ebrios:	drunk
ensalmados:	soulful
dormir.:	sleep.
fatigosa.:	tiring
pierden:	lose
estelas:	trails
apostura:	pose
fantástica:	fantastic
ocupamos:	we occupy
pizarroso:	slaty
repecho:	slope
paradas:	stops
propicia:	conducive
astilla:	sliver
muriendo:	dying
crecen:	grow
miramos:	we look
griegos::	Greeks:
tuerto:	one-eyed
dogo:	small
recostadas:	lying down
mentón:	chin
codo:	elbow
alrededor:	around
involuntaria:	involuntary
tomates:	tomatoes
rábanos:	radishes
bateas:	you punt
aplaca:	plate
familia.:	family.
Iluminado:	Enlightened
obsesión:	obsession
obstinadamente:	stubbornly
Lulio:	Lullius
Raimundo:	Raymond
descendiente:	descendant
herejes:	heretics
alquimistas:	alchemists
prosapia:	lineage
divertida:	fun
forjado:	wrought
fantasear:	fantasize
cuelgue:	hang up
cansarse:	tire
personaje.:	character.
inagotable:	inexhaustible
considera:	consider
mellado.:	jagged.
bolsa:	if
75
:	75
cuentan:	they count
médico:	doctor
indígenas.:	indigenous.
mofa:	mold
buscándose:	looking for
sien:	see
metales.:	metals.
visuales:	visuals
alucinaciones:	hallucinations
clavaria:	keyboard
bajará:	will go down
comprimido:	pill
traga:	trace
relacionados:	related
interesan:	interest
gentes—:	people—
desatención:	inattention
venimos.:	we come
Señor-de-los-Venenos:	Lord-of-Poisons
calificándose:	qualifying
botánicos:	botanicals
repara:	repair
acertadamente.:	aptly.
bautizado:	baptized
haberlos:	have them
explicándonos:	explaining to us
tritura:	crushes
clasificación:	classification
terminología:	terminology
quiénes:	who
mayormente:	mainly
experimentar.:	experiment.
estudiar:	study
estupefacientes:	narcotics
colector:	collector
científico:	scientific
engolado:	haughty
gesticulando:	gesturing
refrescando:	refreshing
víspera—:	eve-
resguardo:	guard
anuncia:	announces
triunfo.:	triumph.
bajorrelieve:	bas relief
reproducen:	they reproduce
ambiente.:	environment.
helenismo:	Hellenism
dórico.:	Doric.
fuste:	skirts
instintiva:	instinctive
diámetro:	diameter
eligieron:	they chose
pilastras:	pilasters
arquitrabe.:	architrave
inventado:	invented
cobrara:	Bill to
hastial:	gable
empinamiento:	steepening
materiales:	materials
prosapia.:	lineage
sábado):	Saturday)
escozor.:	stinging.
Del:	Of the
viajes.:	trips.
difuminadas.:	blurred
imprecisas:	inaccurate
claramente:	clearly
dibujarse:	draw
Pensé:	Think
pintaron:	they painted
llevada.:	carried
sabida:	because
74
:	74
relevaban:	relieved
cantores:	singers
llenaba:	filled
anochecer:	dusk
castigarla:	punish her
menos—:	less-
impulsos:	impulses
refería:	referred
gravísimo:	very serious
ignoraba:	I ignored
entendido:	understood
acostada:	lying down
leer:	file
austero:	austere
reinaba:	reigned
timón—:	rudder-
—afirmaba:	—he stated
fornicaciones:	fornications
Tantas:	So many
holgarse.:	relax
hallaban:	they found
parejas:	couples
albergaban:	they housed
franciscano:	Franciscan
ruinosas:	dilapidated
carcajeó:	cackled
llamarla»:	call her"
Príapo:	Priapus
rubor.:	blush.
distraídamente:	absently
—dejada:	—left
reavivaba:	revived
montañas.:	mountains.
despedazador:	breaker
inconcebibles:	inconceivable
rotos.:	broken.
unidas:	united
mixtas:	mixed
descendían:	they descended
derribadas:	knocked down
intervenido:	intervened
ciega:	blind
ignorados.:	ignored.
perderse:	be lost
florecido:	blossomed
civilización:	civilization
necrópolis:	necropolis
—restos:	-remains
dólmenes:	dolmens
menhires:	menhirs
arcaicos:	archaic
escasos:	scarce
basálticos:	basaltic
huérfano:	orphan
respiraba:	I was breathing
saltar.:	hop.
bárbaro:	barbarian
quietud:	stillness
erguía:	raised
petrificados.:	petrified
tristeza.:	sadness.
pizarrosas:	slate
colinas:	hills
sombrío.:	gloomy.
solemne:	solemn
poniente.:	west.
mástil:	mast
desprendida:	detached
galera:	crowd
poderoso:	powerful
avanzaba:	advanced
instalados:	installed
cuidó:	cared
aclaraciones:	clarifications
mano.:	thousand.
abandonada:	abandoned
frondosa:	leafy
peñones:	rocks
crecían:	they grew
fronda:	frond
anduviera:	walked
rebozo.:	shawl
hatillo:	bundle
fregaderos:	sinks
protestas:	protests
armaron:	they armed
73
:	73
voluntad.:	willpower.
costurero:	sewing box
viniera:	would come
asegurándose:	making sure
riesgo:	risk
engorros:	hassle
enterarse:	find out
figuro:	figure
siguiéramos:	we would continue
descansaríamos:	we would rest
Mañana:	Tomorrow
acompañara:	will accompany
rogándole:	begging
colgó:	hung up
alborozo.:	joy.
aceptó:	accepted
gemas—:	excited—
—deslumbrada:	—dazzled
aseguraba:	assured
comodidad.:	comfort.
adelantar:	pass
debíamos:	we should
entendía—:	understood—
—
que:	—
what
tajó:	milk
decían:	they said
prestaba:	lent
gargantas:	throats
recogido:	collected
mostrando:	showing
bramidos.:	roars.
espumosos:	sparkling
lloraran:	they will cry
descubridores:	discoverers
rogado:	begged
navegable:	navigable
burlando:	mocking
aprestaban:	they prepared
coser:	sew
expresada:	expressed
rabiosamente:	rabidly
concertaba:	arranged
dormidos:	asleep
muerte—.:	death-.
quehaceres:	chores
entregadas:	delivered
cotidiano.:	everyday.
despierta.:	wake up.
intensamente:	intensely
deseando:	wishing
disputa:	dispute
librado:	delivered
reaparecido.:	reappeared.
desperté:	I woke up
almohada.:	pillow.
durmiendo:	sleeping
amanecido:	dawn
prolongaba:	prolonged
comenzaba:	began
rústica:	rustic
demorado:	time-consuming
paganos.:	pagans
ensangrentadas:	bloody
asentaban:	they settled
obispos:	bishops
alfanjes:	alphas
mártires:	martyrs
bizantina:	Byzantine
capilla:	chapel
viejísima:	very old
sobrecogido:	overcoected
desangrarse:	bleed out
venía.:	permission.
vitalidad:	vitality
vitral:	stained glass
plásticos:	plastics
amaneramientos:	mannerisms
áureas:	golden
desteñimiento:	fading
72
:	72
riendo—:	laughing-
trato.:	deal.
prendía:	turned on
descarte:	discard
invocaban:	they invoked
bestias.:	beasts.
extravíos:	misplacements
granizadas:	hailstorms
reumatismos:	rheumatism
sometían:	they subjected
interpelaba;:	interpelava;
grandes.:	big.
blasfemia:	blasphemy
recibían:	they received
Reclamaciones.:	Claims.
Ruegos:	Prayers
Ministerio:	Ministry
disponibles:	available
celestiales:	heavenly
burócratas:	bureaucrats
destajo:	piecework
intercesores:	intercessors
divinos:	divine
categoría:	category
sacados:	taken out
exvotos:	votive offerings
moneda:	currency
pagados:	paid
atributivos:	attributive
Ricos:	Rich
llagas.:	sores.
parezcan:	seem
verdaderamente:	truly
Lázaro:	Lazarus
oído;:	ear;
asido:	acid
enemigo;:	enemy;
garrocha:	pole
saña:	fury
dragón:	dragon
alanceando:	reaching
llave;:	key;
llavero:	key ring
maíz;:	corn;
labre:	labor
aleluya:	alleluia
mañaña:	tomorrow
románicas.:	Romanesque
evoca:	evokes
artesonadas:	coffered
toscos;:	rough;
tozudez:	stubbornness
hornacinas:	niches
acusados:	accused
espesísimas:	very thick
chata:	cottage
Pasión.:	Passion.
enumerados:	enumerated
zócalo:	plinth
portón:	gate
separado:	separate
dependencia:	dependence
prolongación:	extension
enterrado:	buried
dejamos:	we leave
Medio:	Half
atrio:	lobby
contaban:	they counted
ratas:	wheel
Danubio:	Danube
Oscuros:	Dark
Años:	Years
cronistas:	chroniclers
aquéllas:	those
diurna:	daytime
entierro:	burial
ocurrían:	occurred
multiplicación:	multiplication
espantadas:	scared
ignoto:	unknown
violado:	broken
vasijas:	vessels
subiera:	would rise
candentes:	hot
71
:	71
rojiza:	reddish
alzarse:	rise
Extrañados:	Missed
amaneció.:	it dawned
relojes:	watches
entrega.:	delivery.
halagada:	flattered
pasividad:	passivity
decíamos.:	we said.
secándose:	drying
hoyo:	hole
mirándome:	looking at me
apoyó:	support
sesgado:	biased
dándole:	giving
lutos:	collapse
desnudó:	naked
afanosa:	eager
tornará:	will return
fábulas:	fables
tejía:	weaved
adolescencia.:	adolescence.
ansia:	anxiety
deseaba:	I wanted
Avergonzándome:	Embarrassing me
sombríos.:	gloomy
remotas:	remote
moviendo:	moving
arqueaba:	arched
comba:	swing
adosada:	semi-detached
ropa.:	clothes.
atraído:	attracted
corazón.:	heart.
endurecimiento:	hardening
inflamación:	inflammation
provocándole:	provoking him
plasmada:	embodied
promovido:	promoted
exceso:	excess
complicado:	complicated
compadre:	buddy
comenzado:	started
fisiología:	physiology
mitológico:	mythological
revelaba:	revealed
legendario:	legendary
enfermedad:	disease
Auxiliares:	Assistants
oración:	prayer
borra.:	drill.
cono:	Pussy
hirviente:	boiling
verter:	pour
empellón.:	shove.
empujándome:	pushing me
riendo::	laughing:
concluyó:	concluded
estupefacción:	stupefaction
engendraron:	will engender
hallarás:	you will find
«Entrando:	«Entering
añadió::	added:
declamado:	declaimed
consejo:	advice
chocante:	shocking
replicarle:	reply
afortunado:	lucky
audaz:	bold
lección—:	lesson-
—dijo:	-said
turbe:	disturbances
«Vete:	"Alone
inoportuno:	inopportune
irónico:	ironic
Molesto:	Annoying
calentando:	warming up
buscara:	will search
aconsejarme:	advise me
maliciosa:	malicious
Pensaba:	Thought
representaba.:	represented.
sonreír:	smile
Pudieran:	They could
monedas.:	coins.
tendidas:	lying
solemnidades:	solemnities
enlutados:	mourners
preparadores:	preparers
agremiación:	union
hielo:	ice
lechos:	beds
coronas:	crowns
ocultaban:	they hid
oraciones:	prayers
bronces:	bronzes
Recordaba:	I remembered
70
:	70
conocen.:	they know
tarifas:	tariffs
Señores:	Sirs
salvoconductos:	safe conduct
credenciales:	credentials
músicos—;:	musicians—;
servidores:	servers
—se:	—with
arrojarían:	they would throw
incierto:	uncertain
dejen:	the dough
adivinan:	guess
conocían:	they knew
sentido::	sense:
precedieron:	preceded
funerarios:	funeral
remembranzas:	remembrances
despertara:	will wake up
arrastrado:	dragged
lloraban:	they cried
mí—:	my-
—cerca:	—about
deudo:	finger
ello.:	it.
gritando:	yelling
sollozando:	sobbing
maldiciendo:	cursing
Hécuba:	Hecuba
nueve—:	nine-
dramático:	dramatic
persistencia:	persistence
incendiados.:	set on fire.
aullantes:	howlers
sublimes:	sublime
perras:	bitches
soltando:	letting go
coéforas:	coephoras
clamaban:	they cried
campesinas:	peasants
desesperada:	desperate
protestaban:	they protested
apropiado:	appropriate
rezar:	to pray
agonía:	agony
consabidas:	known
repartían:	they distributed
parían:	they gave birth
plegadas:	folded
Impresionado:	Impressed
ataúd...:	coffin...
abrazando:	hugging
atroz.:	atrocious.
desgarramiento:	tearing
puntas:	tips
arrastrados:	dragged
teñidos:	dyed
deshecha.:	undone
inertes:	inert
desmayada:	fainted
sacaron:	they took out
expiaciones.:	expiations.
rajada:	to establish
profecía.:	prophecy.
videncia:	clairvoyance
surgido:	emerged
escalofriante:	spooky
desprender:	detach
trataban:	they tried
amenazando:	threatening
enrabecida:	enraged
resistió:	resisted
quisieron:	they wanted
arrojaría:	would throw
arrancarse:	tear off
lacerar:	lacerates
Decía:	He said
ataúd.:	coffin.
endemoniada:	possessed
parturienta:	parturient
flechada:	arrow
inhumano:	inhuman
69
:	69
lanzó:	launched
agrandados:	enlarged
pálidos:	pale
lustroso:	glossy
enlutada:	mourner
túmulo.:	tomb.
acercaba:	approached
sacada:	balcony
convulsiones.:	convulsions.
sacudida:	shake
flacuchenta:	skinny
muchacha:	girl
colilla:	stub
inclinarse:	lean
Pieles:	Skins
Curtidor:	Tanner
Alcalde:	Mayor
Raudales:	Rapids
Práctico:	Practical
Varios:	Several
lienzos.:	canvases.
crespones:	crepes
velados:	veiled
arrecife.:	reef.
hinchándose:	inchingando
contigo:	with you
dormitorios:	bedrooms
rezaban:	they prayed
gravemente:	seriously
recibidor:	receiver
zaguán:	hallway
bailar.:	dance.
peinados:	hairstyles
cerosas:	waxy
silvestres:	wild
pétalos:	petals
jazmines:	jasmine
recobrados:	recovered
jardines:	grounds
alféizares:	windowsills
olorosas:	smelly
mensuración:	mensuration
conservaba:	preserved
precavida:	cautious
difunto:	deceased
exacta:	exact
fallaba:	failed
gruesos:	thick
hincado:	driven
ataúd:	coffin
túmulo:	tomb
alzaba:	raised
obra.:	work.
estancias:	stays
cupiera:	fit
velando:	watching
llantos:	cries
agrupando:	grouping
solícita:	helpful
diligente:	diligent
enrejadas:	trellises
caserón:	mansion
viernes):	Friday)
graciosamente:	graciously
ostentaba:	flaunted
taguara:	back
demoraba:	delayed
faltaba:	was missing
turbios:	cloudy
arroyos:	streams
deceso:	death
espoleado:	plundered
afectado:	affected
acabada:	finished
medicina.:	medicine.
panderos:	tambourines
jarras-para-bramar-en-funerales:	jugs-for-bellowing-at-funerals
onomatopeyas:	onomatopoeia
enumeró:	listed
revueltas.:	revolts.
tornadizo:	twisty
68
:	68
requeridos:	required
raro:	down
propósitos:	purposes
animadas:	lively
Acostumbrado:	Used to
retumbaba:	rumbled
estacadas:	staked
defendido:	defended
afirmaban:	they claimed
trescientos:	three hundred
huidos:	fled
guerrera:	warrior
comprados:	purchased
valía:	worth
justicia:	justice
perseguida:	persecuted
explotando:	exploding
vagar:	wander
Esquivaba:	I dodged
remotos.:	remote.
azúcar:	sugar
sustento:	livelihood
requerido:	requested
cargadores:	chargers
Nadie:	Nobody
arrumbamiento:	stowage
extraordinario:	extraordinary
diligencias:	errands
saludar:	greet
separara:	will separate
negocio:	business
presentaban:	they presented
arrancarles:	tear them off
habilidad:	ability
traían:	they brought
Cierta:	true
forastero.:	stranger.
interesar:	interest
cesterías:	basket weaving
líricos:	lyrical
antropomorfa:	anthropomorphic
alfarería:	pottery
silbaban:	dress up
sacos:	bags
lagartos:	lizards
cargamento:	cargo
boquete:	blowjob
Desaparecía:	disappeared
rama-no-caída-sino-colocada.:	branch-in-the-fallen-bell-placed.
incisiones:	incisions
dobladas:	folded
descifraba:	deciphered
practicables.:	practicable
conducían:	they drove
poterna:	the paws
permitía:	allowed
pasarela:	catwalk
telúricos.:	telluric.
barroquismos:	baroque
angosta:	narrow
conducía:	drove
entradas;:	entries;
secretas:	secret
conseguirse:	get
hombrecito.:	little man
acotó:	limited
pequeña»:	small"
cupieron:	fit
«Algo:	"Something
puertas.:	doors.
escondida:	hidden
lluvias::	rains:
elaboraba:	elaborated
meteoros:	meteors
armaba:	armed
modelaba:	modellab
alimentaba:	fed
compacto:	compact
desaparecidas:	missing
abismos:	abysses
encerrando:	closing
explicaba—:	explain—
Cubriendo:	covering
individuo:	individual
Gavilán.:	Hawk.
atendía:	attended
lamía:	lamia
bebiendo:	drinking
67
:	67
olvidarme:	forget me
—necesitaba—:	—needed—
Quería:	Wanted to
sollozos.:	sobs.
marché:	walk
catre:	by
hacerle:	do
roto.:	inside.
bañé:	I bathed
hediondas:	hideous
quité:	I removed
metí:	I put
calladas.:	quiet
jaurías:	packs
despertó:	woke up
tembladera:	scrapie
armaduras:	armor
empezaron:	they started
mojados:	wet
charca:	pond
brutalmente:	brutally
resbaló:	slipped
huyó:	fled
sonarle:	sound
asqueaba.:	disgusted
gritaba:	shouted
amarras::	ties:
autorizadas:	authorized
arrepentidas:	regretful
Asustada:	scared
baraja.:	deck.
fallándome:	failing me
alfiler:	pin
calificándola:	rating it
insultar:	insult
empecé:	I started
acumulados:	accumulated
largar:	drop
vapulearla:	beat her
herirla:	hurt her
gozándome:	enjoying myself
excesivas:	excessive
proferir:	utter
cuidarme:	take care of me
solía:	used to
pintora:	painter
recordándome:	reminding me
enfureció:	enraged
vacaciones.:	vacation.
pasaríamos:	we would pass
reponerse;:	recover;
antes;:	before;
Gritaba:	I screamed
rabiosa:	rabid
gesticulación:	gesticulation
calificado:	qualified
atravesaba:	crossed
ende:	end
reclamara:	complained
religioso:	religious
preocupaciones:	concerns
licencias:	licenses
transigiera:	compromise
molestos:	annoying
deberes:	homework
vincularse:	link
oponer:	oppose
intentara:	will try
denuesto:	last minute
burgués:	bourgeois
burguesa.:	bourgeois.
arquetipo:	archetype
pasiones:	passions
placeres:	be placed
colocando:	putting
literarias.:	literary.
haberlo:	have
sociales:	social
filosóficas:	philosophical
respaldo:	back
desafueros:	outrages
interesantes:	interesting
arrastraba:	dragged
militancia:	militancy
gozar:	to enjoy
revolucionarias:	revolutionary
proclamado:	proclaimed
—¡bien:	-GOOD
tratándome:	treating me
montó:	amount
secamente:	shortly
declaré:	declared
deseos.:	wishes.
importaban:	they mattered
sentencia:	judgment
estudiar;:	study;
mérito:	merit
Fingiendo:	Pretending
66
:	66
milenario.:	millennial.
lavandera:	washerwoman
abolir:	abolish
automático:	automatic
dispositivo:	device
dispuestos:	willing
quedaran:	they will stay
agradaba:	liked
domicilio.:	home.
Canción:	Song
válida:	valid
honrada:	honored
animismo:	animism
pervivía:	survived
budare:	open
contentaban:	they were happy
muchísimos:	many
maravillando:	marveling
llevarle:	take him
plusvalía:	capital gain
minería:	mining
atraso:	delay
economista:	economist
«tono:	« request
técnicos:	technicians
categórico:	categorical
«enterado»:	«informed»
adoptando:	adopting
lamentando:	lamenting
cocido:	cooked
Albán:	Albanian
incaicas:	inca
México:	Mexico
Hablaba:	spoke
hojalata.:	tin.
mecía:	rocked
molestarse:	trouble
gallos.:	roosters
peripecias:	adventures
trasladarse:	move
reiterada:	reiterated
monótona:	monotonous
ciudadano:	citizen
forzoso:	forced
encierro:	confinement
infancia—:	childhood-
sensaciones:	sensations
devolviéndome:	giving me back
deleitaban:	they delighted
emociones:	emotions
—para:	-to
alucinado.:	hallucinated.
Floridas:	Florida
Increíbles:	Incredibles
viaje»:	journey"
«invitación:	"invitation
dotando:	endowment
anhelo:	longing
consabido:	known
invocado:	invoked
literario.:	literary.
latente:	latent
cansancio:	fatigue
sentimiento:	feeling
jaspeado:	marbled
lindamente:	beautifully
castaño:	chestnut
flotante:	floating
galpón:	shed
barriles:	barrels
atestada:	attested
impusiera:	would impose
sosnían:	they dreamed
busto:	bust
lonas:	tarpaulins
manchada:	spotted
blusa:	blouse
coloraciones.:	colorations.
cobrizo:	copper
revelándome:	revealing myself
matizado:	nuanced
desigualmente:	unevenly
estopa:	tow
poros:	couples
descubriendo:	discovering
enrojecido:	flushed
maltratado:	mistreated
navegación.:	navigation.
marchitado:	withered
frunciendo:	puckering
examinaba:	examined
notando:	noticing
observarla:	observe her
65
:	65
estrategia:	strategy
Conociendo:	Knowing
atractiva.:	attractive.
bastaban:	they were enough
juventud:	youth
indignas:	unworthy
femeninas:	feminine
vanidades:	vanities
creyeran:	they would believe
prodigaba:	lavished
astucia:	cunning
electricidad:	electricity
resolvía:	resolved
responsos:	answers
franciscana:	Franciscan
ululante:	wild
levantarse:	get up
mohosos.:	moldy
pedazo:	piece
constituían:	they constituted
catres:	cots
penuria.:	shortage.
previsión:	forecast
presas:	dams
tortugas:	turtles
cuartel:	barracks
nuestra.:	our.
parientes:	relatives
engorrosos:	cumbersome
desvelo:	wakefulness
consiguiente:	consequent
aceptándose:	accepting
presagio:	omen
interpretaba:	interpreted
adoración:	worship
entregaban:	they delivered
tuvieran».:	"they had."
vigilias:	watches
sábados:	Saturdays
«en:	"in
arrojara:	would throw
perrero:	kennel
erigía:	erected
interesaba:	interested
observada:	observed
ordenanza:	ordinance
colectivos:	collectives
asistían:	they attended
vigilaban:	they watched
sentaban:	they sat
avisaban.:	they warned
escarbaban:	they dug
husmeaban:	they sniffed
rejas:	bars
zaguanes:	hallways
Ladrido.:	Bark.
librada:	delivered
acercamiento:	approach
arrogándose:	being arrogant
beneficios:	benefits
maniobraba.:	maneuvered
socorrido:	rescued
atrofiados:	atrophied
sentimientos:	feelings
aportaba:	contributed
hermandad.:	sisterhood.
complemento:	complement
Hombre::	Man:
ligaba:	linked
mantenido:	kept
escribía:	wrote
olfato:	smell
podridas;:	rotten;
jinete.:	rider.
admitían:	they admitted
picas:	pizzas
veredas:	sidewalks
sur:	on
caminos.:	roads.
senderos:	trails
borraba:	erased
feracidad:	fertility
rastrera:	creeping
maniguas:	get out
enrevesado:	convoluted
fragosa:	fragile
alejados:	far away
soberbios:	superb
avanzadas:	advanced
erguían:	they stood up
Perro.:	Dog.
ventajas—:	advantages-
64
:	64
asediada:	besieged
llegados:	arrived
(Viernes:	(Friday
vestrae.:	your
solemnitatis:	solemnity
dei:	of the
insigni:	remarkable
Neomenia:	Neomena
cítara.:	zither.
jocundum:	fun
Psalterium:	Psaltery
psalmum:	a psalm
Sumite:	You suspect
historia::	history:
picadas:	bites
neumas:	I don't know
imprimía:	printed
gregoriano:	Gregorian
salmodiaba:	psalmodiaba
refrescarme:	cool down
simbiosis:	symbiosis
incendiada:	burned
esculpido:	carved
gemían:	they moaned
mañas:	tricks
dislocaban:	dislocated
ciertamente.:	certainly.
escenografía:	scenography
identificaba:	identified
cinocéfalos.:	cynocephalosis.
concilios:	councils
copas—:	drinks—
poniente:	west
grupos:	groups
reunidos:	gathered
comenzaban:	they started
crecido:	grown
hincaran:	they will sink
situar:	place
bañaba:	bathed
semillas;:	seeds;
enredándose:	getting tangled
sueltos:	loose
enjauladas:	caged
inteligentes.:	intelligent.
oírle:	hear him
saturación:	saturation
Mouche;:	Fly;
pasamanos:	railing
alargadas:	elongated
rellano:	landing
subía:	went up
reales:	real
poético::	poetic:
baratillo:	dime store
vivía.:	lived.
dimensiones;:	dimensions;
temas:	themes
modernos.:	modern.
estimaba:	estimated
sugerencia:	suggestion
aventajaba:	advantaged
acertó:	got it right
alargó:	lengthened
abandonados.:	abandoned.
63
:	63
sobrecogedor:	startling
añejo:	old
Infantes:	Infants
evocar:	evoke
tajara:	Tajara
Ganelón:	Ganelon
felonía:	felony
Turpín:	Turpin
juglares:	minstrels
evocaciones.:	evocations.
preludiaron:	preluded
antojo:	whim
distraernos:	distract us
invitados:	guests
peste:	fish
asoladas:	ravaged
Barones:	Baroness
arruinadas:	ruined
interesado:	interested
Aguinaldos.:	bonuses.
dinteles.:	lintels.
ruina:	ruin
iniciándose:	getting started
gramas:	grams
entregar:	deliver
abandono:	abandonment
arrozales:	rice fields
surgidas:	arisen
azote:	nitrogen
emigró:	emigrated
blasones.:	blazons.
yedra:	ivy
colgando:	hanging
heredades:	inheritances
arruinado:	spoiled
saqueos:	looting
continuos:	continuous
Holanda;:	Netherlands;
armarios:	wardrobes
ajuares:	trousseau
próspera:	prosperous
repletas:	full
prometiendo:	promising
salvas:	salvo
meras:	the mayor
quejosos:	complainers
terciadas:	plywood
juntaron:	got together
tradición.:	tradition.
tutelar:	guardianship
fundada:	founded
festividad:	festivity
Usando:	Using
barbudo:	bearded
restablecimiento:	restoration
dispersaron.:	they dispersed.
pariendo.:	giving birth
groseros:	rude
preguntando:	asking
perdieron:	they lost
bufones:	jesters
brincando:	joking
echaron:	they threw
afuera:	outside
cirios.:	candles.
escarceo:	dabble
tembloroso:	trembling
encontronazo:	clash
rudo:	love
cerraron:	they closed
engolfarse:	engulf
hisopo.:	hyssop.
aspersiones:	sprinkles
retrocedían:	they retreated
exorcisados:	exorcised
tormentos:	torments
párroco:	parish priest
falsete:	falsetto
patadas.:	kicks
impulsaban:	they promoted
horcajadas:	straddle
volteada:	turned
martirio.:	martyrdom.
Sacer:	sacred
egregio:	excellent
Jerosolimis:	Jerusalem
Mártir:	Martyr
apostolis:	to the apostles
trombón::	trombon:
clarinete:	clarinet
rodando:	running
atacados:	wholesale
despavoridos:	terrified
retrocedieron:	they retreated
62
:	62
Salomé:	Salome
Zebedeo:	Zebedee
plañendo.:	planing
llorando:	crying
permanecieron:	they remained
aldaba.:	latch
repetidas:	repeated
golpearon:	they hit
nefando.:	by doing wrong
monstruo:	monster
fingirse:	pretend to be
Semblante:	Countenance
Falso:	False
perpetuar:	perpetuate
parricidas;:	parricide;
cuernos:	horns
demonio:	devil
Misterio:	Mystery
Belcebú:	Beelzebub
oficiar:	officiate
avanzaban:	they advanced
cristianas;:	Christians;
cofradías:	brotherhoods
penitentes:	penitents
ocultas:	hidden
incendiada.:	burned down.
mísera:	miserable
dirigiéndose:	heading
Diablos:	heck
agudas:	acute
sonaron:	they sounded
organográfica.:	organographic.
croquis:	sketch
tecla:	key
tiorba:	thiorba
bajón:	bassoon
tocaban:	they played
borroso:	blurred
archivoltas:	archival
quemada:	burned
mampostería:	masonry
hincando:	kneeling
trepaban:	they climbed
chimeneas.:	chimneys.
servidores.:	servers.
alzados:	elevated
temblaban:	they trembled
candelera:	candlestick
Pascuas:	Easter
aromos:	aromas
oros:	golds
rajadas:	gusts
salones:	salons
ajemizados:	ajemized
balcones:	balconies
suspendidas:	suspended
higuera.:	fig tree.
columnata:	colonnade
Quedaba:	was left
ennegrecida:	blackened
roída:	gnawed
maestra:	teacher
viga:	error
musgosos:	mossy
cabestrillo:	sling
deshabitadas:	uninhabited
sorteada:	drawn
timón:	rudder
magistral:	highway
Cumplido:	Compliment
alijo.:	stash.
aprovechándose:	taking advantage
impetuosos:	impetuous
Reanudamos:	We resume
centauros.:	centaurs.
tomados:	taken
arrastrada:	dragged
Herradura:	Horseshoe
evidenciándose:	becoming evident
blanquearían:	they would whiten
medioevo:	Middle Ages
ignotas:	unknown
61
:	61
seculares.:	secular.
desempeñando:	performing
alargaba:	lengthened
metopas:	Metopus
próceres:	heroes
mensajero:	messenger
espuelas:	spurs
malezas:	weeds
soportales;:	arcade;
cabeceando:	nodding
municipales.:	municipal.
parques:	parks
enamorados:	lovers
Héroe:	Hero
tallar:	to cut
fundir:	meetings
modelar:	model
ecuestres:	equestrian
estatuas:	statues
coraje:	courage
símbolo:	symbol
establecía:	established
polvo.:	dust.
arrogancia:	arrogance
derribar:	bring down
garañón:	stallion
amansar:	tame
machos:	males
Renacían:	They were reborn
admiradas:	admired
alardear:	boast
destrezas:	skills
desarrollando:	developing
doma:	at home
enseñaban:	they taught
pellejo:	skin
milenarias:	millennial
Volvía:	I was coming back
frontolera.:	to the front
cabezadas:	nods
guadamecí:	guadame
arciones:	artions
vaqueros:	jeans
estribos:	stirrups
cinchas:	webbing
colgaduras:	hangings
atareados:	busy
operarios:	workers
perfumada:	perfumed
talabartería:	saddlery
pelo.:	for the.
cinta:	Love
brida:	flange
logrados:	achieved
encabritamientos:	rearing
resbalar:	slip
canción:	song
en.:	in.
apagada:	turned off
herradura:	horseshoe
bullir:	to boil
fragua.:	forge.
mandil:	chuck
fuelles:	bellows
yunques:	anvils
atareado:	busy
martilleo:	hammering
relincho.:	Rancho.
pregonando:	preaching
anduvo:	walked
circo:	circus
Caballo.:	Horse.
advertí:	I warned
manganas:	manganese
plantados:	planted
pilones:	pylons
eróticos.:	erotic.
emborracha.:	drunk
marineros;:	sailors;
retar:	teasing
vano.:	vain.
espero.:	expect
trepo:	climb
cita.:	dream.
fijan:	fix
azares:	chance
coloquios:	colloquies
importan:	matter
celarla:	guard her
parezco:	I look like
saben.:	per.
saben»:	per"
continuamente:	continuously
desasosiega:	restlessness
hembras.:	females.
prendas:	garments
famosas:	famous
60
:	60
tiendas:	stores
comprado:	purchased
ignoro.:	I ignore
agradarles.:	please them
desenfadada:	carefree
rudeza:	the relative
tratan:	they try
atrevo.:	I dare
invitarme:	invite me
parte;:	part;
vernos:	see each other
rato:	mouse
viriles.:	virile.
parecerle:	seem
molestarla:	bother her
ofenderla:	offend her
conocer.:	know.
aguzados:	sharpened
indagación:	inquiry
escapa:	escape
entidad:	entity
acercarme:	get closer
historias.:	stories.
haciéndoles:	making them
resueltas:	resolved
sólidas:	solid
convivir:	live together
finos;:	thin;
paladares:	palates
matalotaje:	slaughterhouse
tripulación:	crew
mezclarme:	mix
inundaciones.:	floods.
crecientes:	growing
hambrunas:	famines
«comprometida»—:	«committed»—
inexplorado.:	unexplored.
afluente:	tributary
floreado:	flowered
derramados:	spilled
empresa.:	enterprise.
riesgosa:	risky
miedos:	fears
fruta.:	fruit.
mordiendo:	biting
acuesta:	lie down
cortado.:	cut.
trasuda:	exudes
chubasco:	shower
montón:	lot
escondrijo.:	cache.
desván:	loft
doloroso.:	painful.
desasosiego:	unrest
hundo:	a dog
—¡sobre:	-on
pastaban:	note
reses:	recess
majaba:	funny
sudorosa:	sweaty
infancia::	childhood:
—reparo:	-repair
estiércol.:	manure.
husmear:	sniff
paterna:	paternal
granja:	farm
organismo.:	body.
tonifica:	tones
agradable.:	pleasant.
calificarse:	qualify
ebrio.:	drunk.
majan:	the lodge
sudorosas:	sudoros
toldo:	awning
forraje:	forage
acostarme:	go to bed
graznidos:	squawks
reclama:	complain
alrededor::	around:
codornices:	quail
estruendosamente:	thunderously
reloj:	clock
relacionando:	relating
cronógrafo:	chronograph
atento:	attentive
medidor:	meter
maniático:	maniac
Lluvias.:	Rains.
Código:	Code
rigen:	govern
59
:	59
inmutables.:	immutable.
carretera:	road
particulares.:	individuals.
prisas:	rush
toman:	take
agitaciones:	agitations
manantial:	spring
granero:	barn
Océano.:	Ocean.
incontables:	uncountable
albas:	ALBA
esfumar:	smoke
ponientes;:	sunsets;
desgarradura:	tear
tajo:	block
abarcan:	encompass
rayos.:	good heavens.
fulminados:	struck down
nacidos:	born
aquéllos:	those
gigantes:	giants
cronista:	chronicler
derecha.:	right.
válida.:	valid.
añeja:	old
sandalias:	sandals
Embarcamos:	We board
inventado.:	invented.
paroxismos:	paroxysm
descansos:	breaks
estíos:	you are
funden:	melt
agitan:	they shake
medidos:	measured
blasón:	blazon
clavada:	nailed
cornamenta:	antlers
fundador:	founder
nacer;:	be born;
mítico:	mythical
antepasado:	ancestor
monumento:	monument
planicie:	plain
contemplado.:	contemplated.
moverme:	move
Llevo:	He took
sonido.:	sound.
estruendo.:	noise.
adquiere:	acquire
telaraña:	web
vibra.:	vibrates.
topa:	to find
heráldica.:	heraldry.
impasibles:	impassible
gavilanes:	hawks
candelabro:	chandelier
cacto:	cactus
solitario:	lonely
detenidos:	detained
nube::	cloud:
circunferencia:	circumference
abarco:	embrace
guijarro:	pebble
oscurecimiento:	darkening
disuelven:	dissolve
límites:	boundaries
alcanzan.:	they reach.
cortando:	cutting
asustaría:	would scare
dijera:	say
cobraría:	would charge
encuadra.:	frame.
especularse:	speculate
oficios.:	offices.
trabajado:	worked
vocabulario.:	vocabulary.
Silencio:	Silence
58
:	58
lastres.:	ballasts
cargaría:	would load
ése:	that
emocionarla.:	excite her.
constelaciones::	constellations:
inolvidables:	unforgettable
nimiedades:	trifles
atreví:	I dared
sabedor:	knowing
peinarlo:	comb it
soltó:	he blurted out
recostarnos:	lie down
acabamos:	we're done
tornadiza:	twisty
llamarada:	flare
detuvimos:	we stopped
Cerca:	Fence
escobenes:	brooms
alargados:	elongated
tallada:	cut off
Anfitrite:	Amphitrite
velero:	sailboat
encallado:	aground
sollados:	solted
timones:	rudders
cubriera:	would cover
manantiales.:	springs.
cataratas:	cataracts
iniciado:	started
sostenido:	sustained
riberas::	banks:
ondas:	waves
placidez:	placidity
delgadas:	thin
escurrirse:	drain
agitado:	hectic
tierras.:	land.
dividiendo:	dividing
continuando:	continuing
recta:	straight
frase.:	phrase.
lograba:	achieved
escucharlo:	listen to it
deferencia:	deference
anduviéramos:	we would walk
propuse:	propitious
desasosegados:	restless
tratos.:	deals.
guardándose:	guarding
turno.:	shift.
poesía...:	poetry...
exentas:	exempt
únicamente:	only
Biblias:	Bibles
conservaran:	they will keep
barón:	baron
tatarabuelo:	great-great-grandfather
Enciclopedia:	Encyclopedia
Edicto:	Edict
revocación:	revocation
expulsados:	expelled
hugonotes:	Huguenots
tiempo::	time:
paternos:	paternal
podíamos:	we could
bosques.:	forests.
unípedo:	unipedo
Eso:	That
57
:	57
deformaciones:	deformations
reconocía:	recognized
inconciliables.:	irreconcilable.
válidas:	valid
alentaban:	encouraged
desconocía:	I didn't know
supersticiones:	superstitions
leídos:	read
fácil.:	easy.
innata:	innate
expresaba.:	expressed.
aprobando:	approving
difuminaba:	blurred
torno.:	lathe.
alababan:	they praised
talles:	carvings
visibles:	visible
semejanza:	likeness
escritas:	writings
establecían:	they established
pisaba:	stepped
fijaba:	fixed
dibujada:	drawn
vitral.:	stained glass.
restaurarse:	restore
engastarse:	engage
embajadores:	ambassadors
turbante:	turban
cristianas:	christian
antención:	attention
excéntrico:	eccentric
normales.:	normal.
acciones:	actions
figuras;:	figures;
estableciendo:	establishing
espesaba:	thickened
circundaba.:	circled
forastera:	stranger
resultando:	resulting
perceptibles.:	perceptible.
transcurrían:	were passing
nuevamente.:	again.
simpatía:	sympathy
tendía:	tended
alborotosa:	rowdy
comprender::	grasp:
pretendía:	intended
entendía:	understood
pelea:	fight
«Cuando:	"When
sentencia::	judgment:
proverbio:	Proverbs
aplacamiento:	appeasement
maniobra:	maneuver
celos:	jealousy
ambiguo:	ambiguous
santidad.:	holiness.
Egipcíaca:	Egyptian
Evasión:	Evasion
novelas:	soap operas
Lamermoore:	Lamermoor
jardín:	garden
fragancia:	fragrance
devolvía:	returned
romántica:	romantic
ópera:	opera
burlarse:	mock
artesanía:	handicraft
relicarios:	reliquaries
vendían:	they sold
hipocampo:	hippocampus
elegir:	choose
desasirse:	Desasirse
incapacidad:	inability
grotesca:	grotesque
increíblemente:	incredibly
muelles:	springs
exaltado:	exalted
literaria:	literature
prostituta.:	prostitute.
aturdir:	stun
gozaba:	enjoyed
lamentables:	regrettable
56
:	56
consecuencias:	consequences
encendió:	turned on
incitante:	EXCITING
alejara:	would move away
cualquiera:	any
Quise:	I wanted
interpretar.:	interpret.
soslayadamente:	sideways
respondió:	responded
maldecido»:	cursed»
«bruto:	«raw
excusas:	excuses
momento.:	moment.
respetuoso:	respectful
sentó:	sat
irritación.:	irritation.
insuficientemente:	insufficiently
expresaban:	they expressed
reproches:	reproaches
hice:	I did
cortaduras.:	cuts.
ignorara:	will ignore
Tebas.:	Thebes.
hablar—:	talk-
caracterizaba:	characterized
eliminación:	elimination
—explicándoseme:	—explaining to me
perfil.:	profile.
espigado:	spiked
pelea.:	fight.
estúpida:	stupid
bebida:	drink
golpeara.:	would hit
milagrosa:	miraculous
aplacarme:	placate me
excusas.:	excuses.
deshacía:	undone
corredor.:	corridor.
curiosos:	curious
proclamaba:	proclaimed
nada»:	nothing"
nada...:	nothing...
prostitutas.:	prostitutes
golpeado:	struck
otras.»:	others."
untado:	greased
marido.»:	husband."
Debió:	should have
Equivocación...:	Mistake...
sabía...:	knew...
compungido::	contrite:
humilde;:	humble;
oír.:	hear.
Agarrado:	Grabbed
—gritó—.:	-shout-.
posadero.:	innkeeper.
maza:	men
rápida:	quick
vidrios:	glasses
hincadas:	kneeling
rodamos:	we roll
colgué:	I hung up
caer.:	fall.
estrellaron:	crashed
bruscamente:	abruptly
volteó:	turned
puñetazo:	punch
perseguía.:	chased
corredor:	corridor
angustiada.:	distressed.
fuegos.:	fires.
danzaba:	danced
bardas:	fences
cuarto.:	room.
equipaje:	luggage
55
:	55
cargué:	I loaded
entendería:	would understand
eludir:	avoid
vistosas:	showy
ocupaban:	occupied
sentaba:	sat
ellas.:	they.
formidables:	great
Declarando:	Declaring
revivir:	revive
quejosa:	complaining
sexo.:	sex.
sienten:	feel
transfigurada.:	transfigured
soñolienta:	sleepy
permanecido:	remained
peinados.:	hairstyles.
seguirlas:	follow them
invitó:	invited
maravillada:	amazed
alboroto.:	riot.
entraron:	they entered
traída.:	betrayed.
venera:	Venus
besar:	big
aliviándose:	relieving
aprendices:	apprentices
Gante:	Ghent
Amberes:	Antwerp
Hamburgo:	Hamburg
Medioevo:	Middle Ages
ribaldas:	ribald
primas:	premiums
metiéndonse:	getting involved
primicias.:	first fruits.
saltar:	hop
verlas:	see them
reían:	they laughed
fámulas:	fables
graciosos:	funny
gitanos:	gypsies
menosprecio.:	disparagement.
hija:	is
honestas:	honest
fundamento:	foundation
acogidas:	welcomed
tabernas.:	taverns.
trastienda:	back room
alquilaban:	they rented
palangana:	basin
playas:	beaches
cementerios:	cemeteries
Inocentes:	Innocent
Difuntos:	Deceased
fornicando:	fornicating
itinerario:	itinerary
espléndidos.:	splendid
mostraban:	they showed
aprovecharse:	take advantage
romerías:	pilgrimages
ferias:	fairs
sobradillos.:	leftovers
dormidas:	overnight stay
atolondrarse:	to offer
algarabía:	hubbub
fardos:	bales
trajinaban:	they hustled
resplandores.:	glows.
abalorios:	beads
alucinante.:	hallucinatory.
pesebres:	mangers
zapato:	shoe
teatro::	theater:
júbilo.:	jubilation.
naipes:	suits
empuñadas:	fisted
desaforadamente:	wildly
bebían:	they drank
exudaciones:	exudations
fijado:	fixed
barbilla:	chin
parrilladas.:	grills.
aceite.:	oil.
jaspeadas:	marbled
costras:	scabs
chapaleaban:	they splashed
enrojecidos:	flushed
Maltrídente:	Abusers
Buitrehierro:	iron vulture
Flacocuervo:	skinnycrow
llamarlas:	call them
divertía:	had fun
54
:	54
buenos:	good
darles:	give them
Daban:	Different
marejadas:	swells
fogaradas:	bonfires
reflujo:	reflux
flujo:	flow
nacidas:	born
salamandras:	salamanders
quemarse:	burn
siluetas:	silhouette
maléfico:	malefic
impasible:	impassive
horadando:	piercing
isócronamente:	isochronously
hincaba:	drove
máquinas:	machines
obsesionantes:	haunting
regulares:	regular
incansables:	tireless
proseguían:	they continued
encadenadas:	chained
impía.:	impious.
latigazos:	whipping
estirarse:	stretch
bramidos:	roars
chispas:	sparks
enroscaba:	screwed
humano;:	human;
esguinces:	sprains
fugaces:	fleeting
rojinegro:	red and black
antorchas:	torches
reunirlas:	gather them
enfurecidas:	enraged
exterminio:	extermination
exasperadas.:	exasperated
púrpuras:	purple
silbante:	hissing
volaba:	was flying
enjambre:	swarm
—astas:	—antlers
sujetas:	subject
libres:	free
girando:	turning
envolviéndose:	volviéndose
tremolaban:	they tremolated
Atadas:	tied up
asolamiento.:	desolation
restallaban:	crashed
pelada:	naked
ampliaba:	expanded
encenagada.:	staged.
petróleo:	oil
brotar:	sprout
encendida:	lit
peñasco:	boulder
Cayó:	Fell
magistrado:	magistrate
atuendo:	attire
Pilato:	Pilate
infierno:	hell
vistiendo:	dressing
Evangelio:	Gospel
perpetuaban:	perpetuated
almacenadas.:	stored.
haciendas:	estates
imaginarse:	imagine
ropero:	wardrobe
transcurría:	was passing
verdad.»:	TRUE."
grandeza.:	greatness.
incaicos:	inca
alfareros:	potters
hindúes:	Hindus
obscenidad:	obscenity
alardes—:	boasting-
laboriosos:	laborious
amputar:	amputate
aterrado:	grounded
Miré:	Look
contestó.:	he answered.
verdad»:	TRUE"
di:en:	No.: Well
Sobresaltada:	startled
tiempos»:	time"
designios:	designs
sombríos:	gloomy
precisaban:	they needed
ansiedad:	anxiety
reflejaba:	reflected
consternada:	dismayed
penoso:	painful
maldad:	evil
dudando:	doubting
comenzar:	begin
indignación;:	indignation;
desventurada:	hapless
detenía:	stopped
querido.:	darling.
apasionantes:	exciting
aventuras:	adventures
deletrea:	spell
renglones:	lines
pausadamente:	slowly
53
:	53
doblaba:	doubled
contrapuntear:	counterpoint
leía:	read
dividida:	divided
virilidad:	virility
fracasos:	failures
compensación:	compensation
desalientos:	discouragements
tropiezos:	stumbles
afear:	hurt
degradar:	degrade
gustada:	liked
aplicados:	applied
metafóricamente:	metaphorically
verbos:	verbs
pornografía:	pornography
ajenos.:	oblivious
contemplarse:	contemplate
trabazones:	interlocks
animalidad:	animality
físicos:	physical
chanza:	change
promover:	promote
complicidad:	complicity
cerrojos:	bolts
sabiendas:	knowingly
placentera:	pleasant
retozo:	romp
impulsividad:	impulsiveness
sencilla:	simple
acoplamientos:	couplings
grosería.:	rudeness.
encanallara:	canal
vocabulario:	vocabulary
irritaba:	irritated
hipocresía:	hypocrisy
Enemigo:	Enemy
obscenidad.:	obscenity.
tercer:	third
moderna:	modern
contraste:	contrast
cuello::	neck:
cierva:	hind
complacida:	pleased
magnífico:	magnificent
oso:	very
tricromía:	trichromy
hato.:	there.
imitarle:	imitate him
maleta.:	suitcase.
engrisados:	grayed
acerté:	sharp
trabajaban:	they worked
zurcidoras:	zurcidor
brotaba:	gushed
bambúes;:	bamboos;
florecidas:	flowered
deteníamos:	we stopped
soleadas.:	sunny.
íbamos:	we were going
descendiendo:	descending
laderas:	slopes
'de:	'of
linderos:	boundaries
asiento.:	seat.
emprendí:	I undertook
descargado:	discharged
ironía.:	irony.
vislumbraba:	glimpsed
intómodo:	uncomfortable
quebrantos:	brokenness
quejas:	complaints
escuchaba:	I listened
llamábase:	it was called
sabíamos:	we knew
descansó:	rest
fatigada:	fatigued
compañera:	companion
entenderse.:	be understood.
sueltas:	loose
concertado:	concerted
autobús:	bus
subimos:	we go up
traduciendo.:	translating.
conociera:	knew
tuteándola:	tutoring her
dirigió:	directed
goteaba:	dripped
trenzas:	braids
torcida:	twisted
asearse:	clean up
temblorosa:	trembling
aludida:	alluded to
viajera:	traveler
debidamente.:	duly.
pintar:	clever
permitían:	allowed
52
:	52
comisuras:	commissures
adelgazando:	losing weight
avejentaba:	age
pañuelo:	handkerchief
guardaba:	kept
desgano.:	reluctance
vivaz:	vivacious
piafante:	piano
descoloramiento:	discoloration
provocar:	provoke
someter:	submit
madrugar:	get up early
difíciles:	difficult
carreteras:	roads
incomodidades:	discomfort
Habían:	They had
fruto.:	fruit.
despertarse.:	wake up.
desenvaina:	unwind
ganso:	goose
niebla.:	fog.
próximos:	nearby
asomo:	trace
rescoldo.:	ember
largamente.:	widely.
aspiro:	I aspire
puñado:	handful
Abro:	I open
zumo:	juice
bañarse:	take a bath
pulgar:	thumb
sopesa:	weigh
piel;:	fur;
salirle:	get out
cohombro:	sea ​​cucumber
absorbían:	they absorbed
recuerdos:	memories
asociaciones:	associations
olvido:	forgot
completa:	complete
transmisión:	transmission
Corto:	Short
exordio.:	beginning
Freude:	Joy
aus:	out of
Tochter:	Daughter
maestoso:	majestic
prestís:	prestige
desata:	untie
turca»:	Turkish"
«música:	"music
subrayados:	underlines
mesiánicos:	messianic
anhelos:	desires
incumplidas:	unfulfilled
confianza...:	trust...
estafar:	cheat
compartido.:	shared.
idealista.:	idealistic.
acorazarse:	armor
invasor.:	invader.
polilla:	moth
deslucido:	dull
cisnes:	swans
zoología:	zoology
wagneriana:	Wagnerian
admirarme:	admire me
logró:	achievement
vencido.:	defeated.
Nuestra:	Our
entusiasmarme:	get excited
campaña:	campaign
permitió:	allowed
traspié:	stumble
mantenida:	maintained
sumiéndome:	sinking
burdeles.:	brothels.
tabernas:	taverns
mercenario:	mercenary
mentalidad:	mindset
Macabra:	Macabre
perdí:	I lost
weilt:	stays
Flügel:	wing
sanfter:	gentler
dein:	your
Brüder:	brothers
werden:	become
Menschen:	People
alie:	otherwise
henchido:	swollen
Calas.:	Coves.
esencia:	essence
Utopía:	Utopia
hojaldre:	puff pastry
tibio:	warm
ajeno.:	unaffiliated.
bondad:	goodness
Autana:	Autoana
efectivamente:	indeed
Signo:	Sign
fundación:	foundation
Penélope.:	Penelope.
él.:	he.
cuarzos:	quartz
abril:	April
bajado:	lowered
botador:	bouncer
bogar:	arcs
impaciencia.:	impatience.
incisión:	incision
respondiendo:	responding
terminaron:	they finished
disponer:	provide
trascendencia:	transcendence
griegos.:	Greeks.
comenta:	comment
tarda:	afternoon
navegar:	browse
tienda:	store
desollado:	desolate
tomé:	Thomas
matadores:	matadors
mutilado:	mutilated
recientemente:	recently
bravios:	brave
Navio:	Ship
agorero:	doomsayer
salón:	salon
suficiente:	enough
aturdirse:	stun
Padrenuestro:	Our Father
subirse:	get on
blandura:	softness
sobresalta:	startles
convergencia:	convergence
enteros:	whole
extremos:	extremes
colillas:	butts
estaré:	I will be
huelen:	take
abro:	I open
terreno.:	land.
quedó:	remained
indefinidamente:	indefinitely
alarga:	lengthens
abogado:	lawyer
corazón:	heart
figura.:	figure.
revista:	magazine
corren:	they run
Apocalipsis:	Apocalypse
transcurrido:	elapsed
abuso:	abuse
ennoblecidos:	ennobled
estrechez:	narrowness
meros:	heritage
consiste:	consists
quieren:	they want
Venusberg:	Venus mountain
vivirlo:	live it
cemento:	cement
órdenes:	orders
vivienda.:	dwelling.
pública:	public
automatismo:	automatism
guirnaldas:	garlands
haba:	length
multitud:	crew
cruzan:	cross
leves:	light
plantada:	planted
tenerme:	have me
decoración:	decoration
habría:	there would be
indulgencia:	indulgence
escucharme:	listen to me
tránsito:	transit
engañados:	deceived
precisa:	it needs
inmovilizada:	immobilized
biblioteca:	library
deseos:	wishes
crueles:	cruel
espera.:	wait.
galería:	gallery
observo:	noticed
recepción:	reception
conviven:	coexist
borracho:	drunk
presidente:	president
intimidad:	privacy
acude:	come
suelen:	they usually
peores:	worst
vender:	sell
cuartillas:	quarters
repasando:	reviewing
creí:	I believed
cautivo:	captive
explorador:	explorer
sufre:	suffer
sacarme:	take me out
conyugal;:	conjugal;
irrita:	irritates
plácido:	placid
comunión:	communion
fotografías:	photographs
ignorada:	ignored
actualidad:	present
patética:	pathetic
pidió:	asked
exploradores:	explorers
apartamento:	apartment
dramática:	dramatic
publicaciones:	publications
creía:	believed
suburbios:	suburbs
seis:	six
índices:	indexes
nacer:	be born
jarras:	jugs
mando:	command
hablo:	speak
callarme:	shut up
amigos:	friends
llevaría:	would take
culpas:	blame
víctima:	victim
haberme:	have me
regresaré:	I will return
plena:	full
ofrecida:	offered
maleta:	suitcase
cuadernos:	notebooks
expresar:	express
marchar:	leave
aguarda:	wait
acontecimiento:	event
hacerse:	become
sendero:	path
cierran:	they close
aluminio:	aluminum
cantimplora:	canteen
cruzarse:	cross
admiro:	admire
área:	area
pilotos:	pilots
premio:	award
prisionero:	prisoner
contacto:	contact
repite:	repeat
pesado:	heavy
volaban:	they flew
muros:	walls
Petroglifos:	Petroglyphs
marcaban:	they marked
seña:	sign
atropello:	run over
umbral:	threshold
acariciar:	stroke
ansias:	craving
bruma:	Hoar
confundidos:	confused
fomento:	promotion
padecer:	suffer
torrente.:	torrent.
pintan:	they paint
agobio:	burden
aligerando:	lightening
vuelva:	come back
Sigo:	I continue
ir:	and
terminen:	the semester
leproso:	leper
esperando:	waiting
¡Vete:	¡Alone
pedazos:	pieces
agitando:	waving
agujero:	hole
antigüedad:	antique
lepra:	leprosy
oyendo:	hearing
mueve:	moves
licor.:	liqueur.
engaño:	deception
quita:	remove
atadura:	tie
casamiento:	marriage
dominical:	Sunday
festiva:	festive
realmente.:	really.
consumado:	consummated
quién:	who
resquemante:	resequent
haciéndome:	making me
establecida:	established
pasará:	will pass
lamento:	I regret
arduo:	arduous
zozobra:	anxiety
veré:	I will see
suscrita:	subscribed
aceptar:	accept
comedia:	comedy
Podría:	Could
tribunales:	courts
prorrumpo:	I burst out
nupcial:	bridal
cromo:	chrome
cayado:	crook
legales:	legal
obligación:	obligation
Medievo:	Medieval
libretas:	notebooks
«Te:	"The
papel.:	paper.
cuaderno:	notebook
sorpresa.:	surprise.
tregua:	truce
facilidad:	ease
consignas:	slogans
inspiración:	inspiration
colocados:	placed
recuperar:	recover
espontaneidad:	spontaneity
ahora.:	now.
gráfica:	graphic
irregularmente:	irregularly
lápiz.:	pencil.
discantus:	students
pondrá:	will put
vacas:	cows
regrese:	come back
Libación:	Libation
arruga:	wrinkle
respondo:	answer
escándalo:	scandal
ponerme:	put on
opuesto:	opposite
retórica:	rhetoric
morado:	purple
Vidas:	Lives
inglés:	English
ministerio:	ministry
rodean:	surround
versos:	verses
Ciertos:	Some
mentalmente:	mentally
tercio:	third
pentagramas:	staves
esbozar:	outline
empiezo:	start
entrega:	delivery
contemplaba:	contemplated
—forma:	—shape
hechicero:	sorcerer
músicos:	musicians
armonía:	harmony
desconfiar:	distrust
concepción:	conception
lograr:	achieve
polifonía:	polyphony
puros:	cigars
restaba:	remained
directamente:	directly
darle:	give
tropo:	trope
encuadrar:	frame
sencillez:	simplicity
entonación:	intonation
elocuencia:	eloquence
reclamar:	complain
haciéndose:	making
paroxísticos:	paroxysmal
exasperados:	exasperated
compositores:	composers
inflexiones:	inflections
recitativo:	recitative
problema:	problem
incitación:	incitement
necesaria:	necessary
burbujeantes:	bubbly
sonidos:	sounds
resuelto:	resolved
imaginado:	imagined
siguiente:	following
euforia:	euphoria
informes:	information
acontece:	it happens
abrazar:	embrace
sostienen:	hold
pasamos:	we passed
Llueve:	It's raining
manchado:	stained
caracol:	snail
simplemente:	simply
superiores:	superiors
Llego:	Arrive
dibuja:	draw
viento.:	wind.
descubierto:	uncovered
cerca.:	fence.
apremio:	pressure
oscuramente:	darkly
combates:	fighting
etnógrafo:	ethnographer
«Este:	"It is
inteligente:	intelligent
crótalo:	crotalus
numerosos:	numerous
llegará:	will arrive
haciéndosele:	making him
«Hasta:	"Until
castigos:	punishments
ultimo:	last
latines:	Latin
recuerda:	remember
respondía:	responded
explicaciones.:	explanations.
severamente:	severely
granos.:	grain.
públicas.:	public.
comarca:	district
Responsable:	Responsible
libreta:	notebook
horcón:	pitchfork
enrojecidas:	reddened
desconcertado:	embarrassed
tristes:	sad
ingratos:	ungrateful
contempla:	contemplate
mediodía.:	average.
cayado.:	crook.
espesor:	thickness
hundirme:	inside
rodeaba:	surrounded
humanos:	humans
alimento:	food
firmemente:	firmly
atacar:	attack
hubo:	was
vencedor:	winner
—afirma:	—states
«En:	"In
leído:	read
mitologías:	mythologies
advocación:	dedication
tuvieron:	they had
esmalte:	enamel
limpios:	clean
calcedonias:	chalcedony
arcano:	arcane
escombros:	debris
filos:	edges
ascendido:	promoted
evasión.:	evasion.
correo.:	mail.
hermana:	sister
dañado:	damaged
enojo.:	anger.
ausente:	absent
pertenecen.:	they belong.
acusadora:	accuser
funeraria:	mortuary
éstas:	are
fabricación:	manufacturing
líneas:	lines
figuración:	figuration
zafarme:	get away
escalas:	scales
útil:	useful
oficio.:	job.
práctica:	practice
él;:	he;
hipótesis:	hypothesis
ésos:	those
dijeron:	they said
tesis:	thesis
confirma:	confirm
nacimiento:	birth
animales.:	animals.
galope:	gallop
debida:	due
representación:	representation
plástica:	plastic
ingeniosa:	ingenious
prehistórico:	prehistoric
situarse:	situate oneself
especulaciones:	speculations
vanas:	old
teoría:	theory
encuentran:	find
irritación:	irritation
alegría.:	happiness.
claridades:	clarities
entrañablemente:	endearingly
conocido.:	acquaintance.
comprendido:	understood
ceniza:	ash
vengo:	come
aprender:	learn
tomado:	taken
mármol.:	marble.
añoranza:	yearning
columna:	column
conservan:	preserve
franja:	fringe
limpia:	clean
fingimiento:	pretense
disputan:	they dispute
ocultarse:	hide
refleja:	reflects
demoran:	delay
redonda:	round
menester:	need
Noés:	Noah
«Ya:	«Yes
yerbas.:	herbs.
desconocidas:	unknown
regiones:	regions
consideraba:	considered
patraña:	humbug
patas.:	paws.
narrarle:	narrate
—cuenta:	-account
andamiaje:	scaffolding
cantos:	songs
destinos:	destinations
creado.:	created.
sobresaltos:	shocks
circunda:	surrounds
empeños:	pawns
auténticas:	authentic
sobrellevar:	endure
hambruna:	famine
inundación:	flood
nacieron:	were born
orquídeas:	orchids
polvo:	dust
inventar:	inventory
semillas:	seeds
rodean.:	surround.
trabajos:	jobs
asentada:	seated
bombonas:	candy
yacimientos:	deposits
rumbo.:	course.
llaga:	sore
examinando:	examining
llave:	key
llegan:	they arrive
recetas:	recipes
crecidas:	floods
canta:	sing
cura:	treatment
viejos.:	old
caserío:	hamlet
impide:	prevents
interrogaciones:	interrogations
«Así:	"So
vecindario:	neighborhood
cerdos:	pigs
inicia:	starts
cercado:	surrounded
granos:	grain
tenemos:	have
«Esta:	"This
voz::	voice:
construcción:	construction
limpiado:	cleaned
Venados.:	Deer.
portento:	portent
podrían:	could
Época:	Era
Fundador:	Founder
proseguimos:	we continue
tiende:	tends
teniendo:	having
conocedor:	connoisseur
borrando:	erasing
compartir:	share
despide:	say goodbye
señalando:	pointing
comenzara:	will begin
Génesis:	Genesis
apartarse:	depart
helechos:	ferns
legado:	legacy
cargan:	they load
arrojados:	thrown
llenan:	fill
helados:	ice cream
holladas:	trampled
vírgenes:	virgins
espumas:	foams
arabesco:	arabesque
creado:	created
terraza:	terrace
farallón:	cliff
adorna:	adorns
meseta:	plateau
ahondan:	they delve
parados:	stopped
cuarzo:	quartz
vejez:	old age
pudieran:	could
elementalidad:	elementality
grandiosa:	great
desnuda:	naked
peldaño:	step
compás:	compass
salto:	jump
Hace:	Does
ensalmador:	salamander
Palabra:	Word
horrenda:	horrible
sustraerme:	steal away
hombre—.:	man-.
potencias:	powers
desgarrado:	torn
encara:	still
vocalización:	vocalization
jadeo:	panting
ronquido:	snore
embrión:	embryo
repiten:	they repeat
gaznate:	fizzy
increpa:	rebukes
ensalmo:	I praise
mandatarios:	representatives
hinchado:	swollen
respetar:	respect
miran:	another
empreñadas:	engaged
preparándose:	getting ready
Dios.:	God.
estuviese:	was
hoyos:	holes
buitres:	vultures
roer:	stir
sepan:	know
último.:	last.
vértigo:	vertigo
Siento:	I feel
legítima:	legitimate
movido:	moved
Tal:	Of
anatómicas:	anatomical
asomarme:	look out
coincidencia:	coincidence
admitiendo:	admitting
Contemplo:	I contemplate
perros.:	dogs.
gusanos:	worms
tragan:	swallow
devoran:	devour
energía:	energy
pecado:	sin
desnudas:	naked
órganos:	organs
ocultar:	disguise
ubres:	udders
Esos:	Those
retroceder:	back
paralelas:	parallel
atardecer:	sunset
atónito:	amazed
dilatación:	dilatation
hora—:	time—
preocupa:	worries
—ahora:	-now
tuviese:	had
preguntar:	ask
lleve:	carry
mujeres»:	women"
expresiones:	expressions
simplificación:	simplification
esposa.:	wife.
reiteración:	reiteration
refiriéndose:	referring
humano.:	human.
atravesar:	cross
preocupación:	worry
acompasado:	rhythmic
maravillado:	amazed
vean:	see
gineceo:	gynoecium
imaginan:	imagine
atribuyen:	attribute
cuidando:	caring
confió:	trusted
ignorantes:	ignorant
forasteros:	outsiders
intrusos:	intruders
hueso.:	bone.
Quienes:	Who
necesitado:	needy
fijar:	set
inventó:	invention
alcanzamos:	we reach
crecer:	grow
Cero:	Zero
Año:	Year
cayeron:	they fell
cifras:	figures
devolviendo:	returning
calendarios:	calendars
perdiendo:	losing
bálsamos:	balms
plectro:	plectrum
Conocía:	I knew
tetas:	tits
soñar:	dream
parroquia:	parish
viajan:	they travel
tenazas:	tongs
pasando:	passing
antes.:	before.
llegándose:	arriving
Acaso:	Chance
nostri.:	our.
misas:	masses
ninguna:	none
ídolos:	idols
adoradores:	worshipers
catedrales:	cathedrals
subterráneos:	underground
solemnidad:	solemnity
dolorosa:	painful
mí::	my:
pasó:	passed
mirada.:	look.
situaba:	situated
Cáliz:	Chalice
herrumbres:	rust
litúrgicos:	liturgical
saliendo:	leaving
entrando:	entering
contrapunto:	counterpoint
medida.:	measure.
confiado:	confident
excepcional:	exceptional
deleitosamente:	delightfully
pusieron:	they put
resonancia:	resonance
desagradable:	disgusting
órgano.:	organ.
emplumada:	feathered
ornamentado:	ornate
cilindro:	cylinder
puse:	side
colección:	collection
viaje::	journey:
llamándome:	calling me
dirigía:	directed
caderas:	hips
fuertes:	strong
severa:	severe
mozos:	guys
humano:	human
fibras:	fibers
éste:	this
necesarias:	necessary
situados:	situated
ocupaciones:	occupations
impresión:	impression
aclarar:	clarify
pasadas:	passed
ancianas:	old women
pezones:	nipples
negras.:	black.
Casi:	Almost
geológica:	geological
aceptando:	accepting
destinados:	intended
hilos:	threads
barridos:	swept
gótica:	gothic
irse:	go
detuve:	I stopped
salí:	I went out
dormido:	asleep
Nuestras:	Our
semilla:	seed
maceración:	maceration
pesca:	fishing
flechas:	arrows
moriche:	in chili
guayuco:	hang on co
remedio.:	remedy.
—del:	-of the
tragar:	swallow
despierto:	awake
dejarlo:	leave it
impedir:	prevent
peligroso:	dangerous
relámpagos:	lightning
dibujadas:	drawn
colmo:	full
espuma:	foam
saltando:	jumping
peñas:	rocks
escapar:	escape
metiendo:	putting
caiga:	fall
peligros.:	dangers.
estalla:	explodes
trabado:	stuck
hayamos:	let's have
parte.:	part.
paisajes:	landscapes
anunciadores:	announcers
vemos:	we see
interrumpe:	interrupts
percata:	notice
mercaderes:	merchants
decires:	you say
oficiante:	officiant
humildad:	modesty
demostrarme:	show me
socarronamente:	slyly
fangoso.:	muddy.
reconocer:	recognize
hubiésemos:	we would have
ánfora:	amphora
alturas:	heights
tremendas:	tremendous
dibujaban:	they drew
rectas:	straight
capítulos:	chapters
gorro:	cap
mentía:	lied
frutas:	fruits
madurez:	maturity
detenerse:	stop
curiaras.:	would you like
vegetales:	vegetables
falso:	false
trampa:	trap
mentira:	lie
plomo:	lead
falena:	moth
anegada:	flooded
termes:	terms
vientos:	winds
revelando:	revealing
líquenes:	lichens
encajes:	lace
colgaban:	they hung
sorbido:	sordid
palmeras:	palm trees
especies:	species
arrojaban:	they threw
guacamayos:	macaws
ramazón:	branch
garzón:	waiter
lagunatos:	lagoons
intríngulis:	intrigued
trabada:	stuck
légamo:	let's go
casada:	married
oportunidades:	opportunities
inicio:	start
espectros:	spectra
Habrá:	There will be
envuelve:	wraps
inexploradas:	unexplored
Prueba.:	Proof.
capitular:	capitulate
amenazas:	threats
expectación:	expectation
aturdido:	stunned
grillos:	irons
caño.:	spout.
sustos:	scares
ranas:	frogs
hamaca.:	hammock.
atroz:	atrocious
resonaba:	resonated
enjambres:	swarms
caimán:	caiman
desembocamos:	we flow
semblantes:	countenances
avispas:	wasps
enredados:	tangled
abrían:	they opened
telarañas:	cobwebs
canoa.:	canoe.
hueco:	gap
morada:	household
desconcierto:	bewilderment
espejismos:	mirages
cerrados:	closed
ángulos:	angles
maderos:	lumber
anegado.:	waterlogged.
troneras:	enthroned
rayos:	good heavens
quebradas:	ravines
transparentes:	transparent
chinches:	bed bugs
vinagre:	vinegar
grisáceos:	grayish
barbudos:	bearded
erizados:	bristling
detenidas:	detained
opalescentes:	opalescent
indecisa:	undecided
rojizo:	reddish
ocre:	ocher
agujereadas:	perforated
alud:	avalanche
polvos:	powder
horruras:	horrors
simientes:	seeds
limalla:	with slime
plancton:	plankton
llovía:	it was raining
cuello.:	neck.
sacándome:	taking me out
increíble:	incredible
barreras:	barriers
obstáculos:	obstacles
embarcación:	vessel
abovedado:	vaulted
pasadizo:	anecdote
abría:	opened
infinito:	infinite
sirviendo:	serving
verticalmente:	vertically
superpuestas:	overlapping
despierta:	wake up
balanceo:	swinging
despacio:	slowly
atención.:	attention.
lindero:	boundary
absolutamente:	absolutely
hunde:	dogs
doce:	sweet
habituado:	accustomed
bragas:	panties
tomada:	outlet
Utre.:	Tomorrow
capellán:	chaplain
pueril:	childish
dominada:	dominated
gramíneas:	grasses
tupida:	bushy
geometrías:	geometries
(Tarde:	(Afternoon
caras.:	guys.
acurrucados:	snuggled
tradición:	tradition
soltar:	release
arrojo:	daring
Vivimos:	we live
cobrado:	charged
sílabas:	syllables
oírnos.:	eloquent
implica:	implies
precisan:	they need
torpezas:	clumsiness
conocimos:	we met
ladra:	thief
festín:	feast
terminado:	finished
estrofa:	stanza
suele:	usually
asombrado:	amazed
extraño:	strange
colgado:	hanging
concluye:	concludes
Dicen:	They say
miseria:	misery
flancos:	flanks
llamada:	call
parecida:	similar
Micenas:	Mycenae
abandonó:	abandonment
caracteres:	characters
enseñaron:	they taught
enfrente:	opposite
humedad.:	humidity.
Caño:	Spout
viéndose:	seeing each other
Seguro:	Insurance
arriba.:	above.
hereje:	heretic
casado:	married
iniciales:	initials
tengamos:	we have
creando:	creating
conmigo.:	with me.
botánico:	botanical
prestancia:	presence
cuchillos:	knives
trueques:	barter
sigo:	I continue
haciéndola:	doing it
inconsciente:	unconscious
llorosa:	tearful
maravilla:	wonder
amantes:	lovers
concertada:	concerted
despachado:	dispatched
Hemos:	We have
encontraron.:	they found.
confluencia:	confluence
vellón:	fleece
distinto.:	distinct.
Somos:	We are
aullando:	howling
estertora:	death rattle
afinca:	affina
Gorgona:	Gorgon
sardónica:	sardonic
sube:	go up
quebrarse:	break
ternura:	tenderness
abrazo:	hug
pálpito:	palpito
sembraba:	sowed
éramos:	we were
así—:	So-
repentina:	sudden
Agarro:	Grab
epíteto:	epithet
subleva:	revolt
alabanzas:	praise
baño:	bathroom
estera:	foreign
respira:	breathe
suspira:	sigh
abrazo.:	hug.
reflejarse:	reflect
mío;:	mine;
comido:	eaten
clásicos:	classics
obligaba:	forced
proceder:	proceed
rectitud:	rectitude
padres:	parents
otros.:	others.
ejemplar:	copy
derrota:	defeat
soportar:	endure
picada:	chopped
estúpidamente:	stupidly
fronteras:	borders
enferma:	sick
comprimidos:	pills
estremecida:	extremecidal
fiebre.:	fever.
pausado:	slow
bíblico:	biblical
atribuir:	assign
miraban.:	they looked
sonaban:	they sounded
olla:	be
pescados:	fish
demasiada:	too much
malestar:	discomfort
silenciosa:	silent
calmada:	calm
regresé:	I came back
retornos:	returns
llegara:	will arrive
convivencia:	coexistence
ajena.:	foreign
dureza:	hardness
permanezco:	I remain
gimotea:	gimme
denegación:	denial
Todavía:	Still
ferocidad:	ferocity
insultos:	insults
bárbaramente:	barbarously
refajo:	they're rehashing
pensamos:	we think
Voces:	You
alimañas:	vermin
cordilleras:	mountain ranges
endeudado:	indebted
miserias:	miseries
margen:	margin
regresando:	returning
profundidad:	depth
gemas:	excited
maravillosa:	wonderful
decepción:	disappointment
regocijo:	joy
vara:	be
tubo:	profit
nombre.:	name.
decir::	say:
tuvimos:	we had
devolvió:	returned
erguido:	erected
astrales:	astral
logrado:	accomplished
acantilados:	cliffs
remotos:	remote
pintaba:	painted
dibujos:	drawings
quedarían:	would remain
Muerte.:	Death.
contemplación:	contemplation
pupilas:	pupils
párpados:	eyelids
Maíz.:	Corn.
varones:	men
afirmaba:	claimed
científica:	scientific
aceptada:	accepted
seriedad:	seriousness
frailes:	friars
obligado:	obliged
ciegos:	blind
cantado:	sung
rematadas:	finished
resplandeciente:	resplendent
heridas:	wounds
cerraban:	they closed
curanderos:	healers
osamentas:	bones
soldado:	soldier
estampaba:	stamp
castellana:	Spanish
segur:	for sure
rocas.:	rocks.
comerse:	eat
mudo:	period
alucinado:	hallucinated
envueltos:	wrapped
testimonios:	testimonials
vetas:	veins
cubren:	cover
escalonamiento:	staggering
orilleros:	edgers
provincia:	province
sorna.:	sarcasm.
bibliotecas:	libraries
lejanas:	distant
cavernas:	caves
cubiertas:	covers
armadura:	armor
parezca:	seem
palabras::	words:
Pasan:	They pass
solidario:	supportive
encerrado:	closed
ninguno:	none
tinieblas.:	darkness.
cimeros:	crests
peldaños:	steps
brasas.:	embers.
leños:	logs
azules:	blue
Unos:	Some
unidos:	joined
sentados:	sitting
remembranza:	remembrance
ofrecen:	offer
diminuta:	tiny
toscas:	rough
tratados:	treaties
proclamarse:	proclaim oneself
soledades:	loneliness
historias:	stories
entiende:	understand
larguísimos:	very long
índice:	index
llevan:	they carry
vistos:	visas
destina:	intended
agobia:	overwhelms
interesarse:	interest
conocida:	known
selváticos:	jungle
tósigos:	codes
curare:	cure
aventurero:	adventurous
raras.:	rare.
inesperado:	unexpected
remedar:	helper
servir:	serve
sostén:	support
aleros:	eaves
resistencia:	endurance
normas:	norms
dictado:	dictation
construir:	build
suelto:	loose
sapos:	frogs
capuchino.:	cappuccino.
aspirar:	aspire
debían:	they had to
abandonada.:	abandoned.
pregunté:	I asked
aclaración:	clarification
latido:	beat
guijarros:	shingle
erráticos:	erratic
erguidas:	erected
dispersión:	dispersion
edades:	ages
perdida:	lost
rectangulares:	rectangular
amontonamientos:	pile-ups
rematada:	finished
yacían:	lay
antesala:	anteroom
esquivar:	dodge
bordeando:	bordering
caucheros.:	nightmares.
delante:	in front of
locura.:	craziness.
reunió:	meeting
aquiescencia:	acquiescence
partida.:	match.
Asunción:	Assumption
adelante.:	forward.
etapa:	stage
rutilante:	sparkling
podríamos:	we could
boga:	have
impaciente.:	impatient.
empezaba:	started
tragantes:	swallowers
atravesados:	crossed
levantadas:	raised
pavorosa:	terrifying
límite:	limit
llevara:	will carry
atajo:	shortcut
Negras:	Black
obligada:	obligatory
creyó:	believed
contrario::	contrary:
griego.:	Greek.
plácidamente:	placidly
vestidas:	dressed
llevaron:	they carried
fatigas:	fatigue
enervante:	annoying
herraduras:	horseshoes
oreja:	ear
encajados:	embedded
tremebunda:	trembling
reciente:	recent
rogativas:	prayers
diario:	diary
funcionarios:	officials
cotidiana:	everyday
agobiados:	overwhelmed
pelos:	by the
cuelgan:	they hang
vestido:	dress
azada:	hoe
Oficios:	Offices
atraviesa:	goes through
éxodo:	Exodus
primitivas:	primitive
espolones:	dewclaws
volúmenes:	volumes
cincel:	chisel
invadido:	invaded
(Sábado:	(Saturday
vecinos:	neighbors
ciudades.:	cities.
manadas:	herds
narradas:	narrated
viese:	see
región:	region
cataclismo:	cataclysm
estriadas:	striated
amaranto:	amaranth
llover:	rain
comenzaron:	they started
estuvo:	was
polen:	Poland
cenizas:	ashes
Poco:	Bit
lágrimas:	tears
ratos:	rats
vecindad:	neighborhood
apetecer:	feel like
asunto:	affair
apoyados:	supported
alcanzaba:	reached
acercando:	approaching
subir:	rise
ascensión:	rise
cruzar:	cross
disgusto:	disgust
Catorce:	Fourteen
aliviada:	relieved
teñido:	had
atareada:	such
fogones:	stoves
ollas:	pans
tinajas:	jars
fijó:	fixed
procede:	proceed
repentinamente:	suddenly
Iba:	Different
recitando:	acting
respondí:	I responded
singularmente:	singularly
alcanzaban:	they reached
usados:	used
negocios:	business
gente—:	people-
mezquina:	petty
Orilla:	Bank
monedas:	coins
milenario:	millennial
cumplían:	they fulfilled
pliegue:	fold
reino:	kingdom
observado:	observed
observó:	noticed
sospechar:	suspect
preparando:	preparing
apareciendo:	appearing
desesperación:	despair
arrojadas:	thrown
Muerte:	Death
mágica:	magic
conminatoria:	injunction
protesta:	protest
remoto.:	remote.
difuntos:	deceased
vestir:	dress
infancia:	childhood
tareas:	tasks
presencia.:	presence.
Madres:	Mothers
corriente.:	current.
numerosas:	numerous
familias:	families
causaron:	caused
Juicio:	Judgment
desgracias:	misfortunes
profundidades:	depths
misterioso:	mysterious
apartarla:	put it away
estertores:	death rales
entrecortada:	choppy
ronca:	snore
herida:	wound
belleza.:	beauty.
Toda:	All
tabaco:	tobacco
gravas:	it matters
ménsulas:	mensulas
rosarios:	rosaries
tú:	you
bendita:	blessed
eres:	are
obsesionante:	haunting
cintas:	ribbons
apretados:	tight
moraban:	they dwelt
Carpintero:	Carpenter
martillazos:	hammer blows
resonante:	resonant
anchos:	wide
encendiendo:	lighting
ordenando:	ordering
(Noche:	(Evening
absurdo::	absurd:
velorio:	wake
encaminé:	I headed
llegada:	arrival
brusquedad:	suddenness
morir.:	to die
cuerno:	horn
trompas:	deceives
afinadas:	in tune
Pintado:	Painted
mudar:	to change
regresaba:	was returning
tambores.:	drums.
tribu:	tribe
veta:	Know
dejarlos:	leave them
respecto:	regard
interrogaban:	they interrogated
utilidad:	utility
peines:	combs
cría:	creates
aparecía:	appeared
secreto.:	secret.
hablando:	talking
Aprovechando:	Taking advantage
orquídeas.:	orchids.
vivos:	alive
trayendo:	bringing
surgía:	arose
llaves:	keys
mapa:	map
nación:	nation
vestigios:	vestiges
tesoros:	treasures
jicara:	mention of
advirtiéndome:	warning me
enmarañadas:	tangled
cejas:	eyebrows
enormemente:	enormously
llamadas:	calls
trago:	I bring
grueso:	thick
cieno:	silt
aullido:	howl
moverse:	move
tortugas.:	turtles.
suceder:	happen
asombrosa:	amazing
lastre:	plates
discusiones:	discussions
canadiense:	Canadian
quedara:	will remain
cumbres:	summits
quedar:	meet
orden.:	order.
encerrara:	closed
criterio:	criterion
bienestar:	welfare
Siempre:	Always
capillas:	chapels
estéticas:	aesthetic
entregarse:	surrender
intelectuales:	intellectuals
intimidades:	intimacies
insulto:	stroke
burgués.:	bourgeois.
encomendada:	ordered
navegando:	browsing
afirmó:	stated
canciones:	songs
conservar:	keep
individuos:	individuals
fiebres:	fevers
ajenos:	alien
vivían:	they lived
habitantes:	inhabitants
contraria:	contradicts
explotación:	exploitation
falacias:	fallacies
agricultura:	agriculture
maravillas.:	wonders.
aldeas:	villages
escalinatas:	stairs
fortalezas:	strengths
pirámides:	pyramids
jarro:	pitcher
sorbos:	sips
suavemente:	gently
desgaire:	disabled
faldas:	skirts
lámpara:	lamp
arrastrándose:	crawling
olvidadas:	forgotten
permanecía:	remained
poeta:	poet
fortuitos:	fortuitous
cotidiano:	everyday
implicaciones:	implications
frases:	phrases
emprendido:	undertaken
gritar:	scream
aburrimiento:	boredom
agarrarse:	hold
resinas:	resins
zonas:	zones
duras:	hard
suya:	to the water
intelectual:	intellectual
callarse:	shut up
quinqué:	five
pésimo:	appalling
inesperados:	unexpected
pintadas:	painted
—desde:	-from
antífona:	antiphon
moblaje:	furniture
arrastraban:	they dragged
llamaban:	they called
religión:	religion
practican:	they practice
tenerse:	have
resignada:	resigned
lúgubre:	lugubrious
asados:	roasted
estiraban:	they stretched
partido:	party
compartía:	shared
verticalidad:	verticality
mutuo:	mutual
pacto:	covenant
Hombre.:	Man.
alianza:	alliance
erizado:	bristly
tenso:	tense
oquedad:	cavity
engañosas:	misleading
malangas:	oily
esparcidos:	scattered
centinelas:	sentinels
distante:	distant
libraba:	liberated
húmeda:	wet
Usualis:	Usual
Líber:	Bast
lejana.:	distant
sonaba:	it sounded
distraído:	distracted
culturas:	cultures
preguntaba:	I asked
sí.:	Yeah.
pintaban:	they painted
resultado:	result
identificables:	identifiable
fácilmente:	easily
estilos:	styles
grado:	degree
observaciones:	observations
imaginarias:	imaginary
arquitecturas:	architectures
palpaba:	Pulp
borda:	edge
atracadero:	dock
décimas:	tenths
cantaban:	they sang
guerras:	wars
acabó:	just
pantanos.:	swamps.
deshaciéndose:	falling apart
sábanas:	bed sheets
arcas:	chests
reducido:	reduced
observaba:	observed
lento:	this
presentó:	presented
embarcar:	embark
embaldosado:	tiling
gimiente:	moaning
grupo:	group
procesión:	procession
espadaña:	bulrush
montados:	mounted
diera:	give
est:	East
apoyado:	supported
cayendo:	falling
tropezando:	tripping
corona:	crown
hombros.:	shoulders.
Apóstol:	Apostle
abrieron:	opened
batientes:	swings
disfraz:	costume
eterna:	eternal
máscara:	mask
cortos:	shorts
saltos:	heels
situada:	located
ladrillo:	brick
aparecieron:	appeared
admirado:	admired
ángeles:	angels
tímpano:	eardrum
desplomarse:	collapse
quedaban:	were left
hendeduras:	crevices
invisibles:	invisible
eje:	axis
conservaban:	they kept
cortinas:	curtains
ligereza:	lightness
campanas:	bells
matas:	fed
hielo.:	ice.
soportal:	support
comejenes:	termites
rotura:	rip
hundían:	sank
jambas:	jambs
desiertas:	deserted
pértiga:	pole
(Jueves:	(Thursday
hemisferio:	hemisphere
cuarta:	quarter
América:	America
máxima:	maximum
oculto:	hidden
aguardaba:	I was waiting
reunión:	meeting
cita:	dream
ningún:	none
testículos:	testicles
solidaridad:	solidarity
toro:	visiting
apretar:	squeeze
físicas:	physics
directo:	straight
domingos:	Sundays
reaparecido:	reappeared
luciendo:	showing off
asomada:	leaning out
temeroso:	fearful
corcel:	steed
nervioso:	highly strung
anunció:	advertisement
penetrar:	penetrate
muelle:	dock
atracamos:	we dock
sueños:	dreams
cierro:	I close
latidos:	beats
enardecer:	inflame
comparte:	share
vigilar:	watch
echó:	threw
camisa:	shirt
señas:	address
tontas:	stupid
atenciones:	attentions
libremente:	freely
estrechamente:	tightly
Otra:	Other
cabeceras:	headers
mulata:	mulatto
camisón:	nightgown
baldes:	buckets
sólido:	solid
directores:	directors
vacilaciones:	hesitations
realiza:	perform
asombra:	amazes
trepa:	climb
olía:	oil
lejos.:	far.
huele:	smells
respondiera:	would respond
ajíes:	chili peppers
otro.:	other.
cocineras:	cooks
levantando:	lifting
salomas:	Salom
Manatí:	Manatee
revuelo:	stir
cuerda:	rope
sueño.:	dream.
apetito:	appetite
metrónomo:	metronome
Observo:	Noticed
ajustarse:	conform
navega:	navigate
valen:	worth
proliferación:	proliferation
derramarse:	spill
abriendo:	opening
niebla:	fog
opuesta:	opposite
ensancha:	widens
habitados:	inhabited
Servando:	Serving
apartar:	set aside
resabios:	aftertaste
torbellinos:	whirlwinds
sentirme:	feel
emblema:	emblem
junqueras:	reeds
asoma:	appears
confín:	confine
calma:	calm
acompañado:	accompanied
párpados.:	eyelids.
cirros:	cirrhosis
alzar:	raise
totalidad:	whole
sementales:	stallions
pasto:	meal
hago:	do
hablara:	will speak
silencios:	silences
espeso:	thick
silencio;:	silence;
usado:	used
Habiendo:	Having
(Miércoles:	(Wednesday
escenografías:	scenery
componían:	they composed
advertir:	warn
risas:	laughter
respuestas:	answers
celebraba:	celebrated
interrogaba:	interrogated
hablarle.:	talk to him
íntimo:	intimate
orilla.:	bank.
grava:	important
desnudos:	nudes
ranas.:	frogs.
abandonados:	abandoned
bien—:	GOOD-
Andando:	Going
reuniones:	meetings
genésico:	genetic
corría:	ran
fuegos:	fires
alejándose:	moving away
aliviado:	relieved
cerveza:	beer
compró:	bought
propuesta:	proposal
cerrar:	close
francés:	French
contar:	count
falsa:	false
regresaban:	they returned
invadida:	invaded
pasados:	past
antepasados:	forefathers
desertado:	deserted
observé:	observed
pequeña:	small
mapa.:	map.
separaba:	separated
obstante:	however
acoplamiento:	coupling
repetía:	repeated
factores:	factors
prejuicios:	prejudices
costumbres:	traditions
imponía:	imposed
vidrio:	glass
acometida:	affected
negada:	denied
consciente:	conscious
cohibido:	restrained
torpe:	clumsy
embellecía:	embellished
cabelleras:	scalps
ensombrecidas:	overshadowed
cabalmente:	completely
antaño:	yesteryear
actuar:	act
maneras:	ways
exotismo:	exoticism
ambiente:	environment
establecer:	establish
dolido:	hurt
apoyo:	support
mezcla:	mix
toscos:	rough
generación.:	generation.
comunes:	common
tratara:	will try
sienes.:	temples.
acercado:	approached
volví:	I returned
importancia.:	importance.
suceso:	event
idiota:	idiot
apartado:	apart
examinar:	examine
riña:	fight
Siete:	Seven
broma:	joke
preguntarle:	ask him
artículos:	articles
triunfo:	triumph
desprendido:	detached
sombreado:	shading
movía:	moved
vimos:	we saw
estampa.:	print.
remedio:	remedy
llenaban:	they filled
sentarse:	feel
alarde:	parade
limpiaba:	cleaned
acertaba:	was right
explicaba:	explain
levantó:	rose
muñecas:	dolls
levantaban:	they raised
fuerzas:	forces
brazos.:	arms.
empujaba:	pushed
talle:	to him
agarrado:	grabbed
llegué:	I arrived
últimamente:	lately
sacando:	taking out
algo.:	something.
extrañeza:	strangeness
únicas:	unique
turbia:	cloudy
atmósfera:	atmosphere
Después:	After
permiso:	permission
venían:	they came
gozarse:	enjoy
resueltos:	resolved
hatos:	six
llegadas:	Arrivals
estrechos:	narrow
tapias:	walls
Lucía:	Lucia
Cristóbal:	Christopher
procesiones:	processions
gallinas:	chickens
despertar:	wake up
maletas:	suitcases
Esas:	Those
adornaban:	they adorned
fangoso:	muddy
tacón:	tacon
aparecido:	appeared
vehículo:	vehicle
traídas:	betrayed
jugadores:	players
quedaron:	were left
revueltas:	revolts
fichas:	chips
colgadas:	hanging
charcos:	puddles
resplandor:	radiance
terminó:	term
demonios:	demons
fuesen:	were
obstinado:	obstinate
tronco.:	stem.
movimientos:	movements
extracción:	extraction
zumbantes:	buzzing
zarza:	bramble
convulsiones:	seizures
sacudido:	shaken
amasado:	kneading
rompía:	broke
transformaba:	transformed
parado:	stopped
pozos:	wells
divino:	divine
llamaradas:	flares
prodigioso:	prodigious
sugerido:	suggested
hablado:	spoken
prolongado:	prolonged
encerró:	locked up
Pasión:	Passion
Renacimiento:	Renaissance
temprano:	early
jaurías.:	packs
acoso:	harassment
entregados:	delivered
váquiro:	vakiro
hábitos:	habits
solían:	they used to
ricas:	rich
decorado:	decorated
presente.:	present.
auténtica:	authentic
escultores:	sculptors
hombro.:	shoulder.
hablar.:	talk.
impotencia:	impotence
párrafo:	paragraph
infamia:	infamy
ordenaban:	they ordered
lentitud:	slowness
rapidez:	speed
afirmación:	affirmation
hallara:	to cases
empeñada:	pawned
determinada:	determined
repulsión:	repulsion
desinencias:	endings
desajuste:	maladjustment
excluían:	they excluded
testigos:	witnesses
aislamiento:	isolation
actividad:	activity
sarcasmo:	sarcasm
vergüenza:	shame
famosa:	famous
Brabante.:	Brabant.
malo:	place
impreso:	printed
volumen:	volume
buscó:	look for
sacó:	sack
continua:	continues
tejado:	roof
palmera:	palm
cactos:	cacti
apacibles:	peaceful
recodo:	bend
Sur:	On
embarcaciones:	boats
salían:	they went out
llegaríamos:	we would arrive
alegremente:	happily
Contento:	Happy
familiaridad:	familiarity
temblor:	shaking
hablé:	I spoke
distraerla:	distract her
desayuno:	breakfast
desagrado:	dislike
cabellos:	hair
cutis:	skin
empañado:	tarnished
Quien:	Who
disciplina:	discipline
bastado:	enough
víspera.:	eve.
cansada:	tired
salió:	came out
traspatio:	backyard
viviente:	living
chimenea:	chimney
armario:	cupboard
deleite.:	treat.
ají:	chili
frialdad:	coldness
escuchar:	listen
espero:	expect
feriante:	showman
promesas:	promises
aburre:	boring
rastro:	trail
aceptaba:	accepted
sentirse:	feel
trató:	deal
regresó:	return
amparo:	protection
raso:	satin
utilería:	prop
pasada:	past
hechos.:	facts.
di:	Of
compañeros:	companions
arrastrar:	drag
envolvía:	wrapped
olvidado.:	forgotten.
invocando:	invoking
Sinfonía:	Symphony
tolerancia:	tolerance
marchado:	left
necesita:	needs
marca:	mark
diciembre):	December)
Cabellera:	Hair
andando:	going
descansar:	rest
destinadas:	intended
busco:	I'm looking for
Alzo:	I get up
bóvedas:	vaults
colectivo:	collective
debilidad:	weakness
periodista:	journalist
Parece:	It seems
conyugal:	conjugal
abraza:	hug
Tengo:	Have
mentiras:	lies
velado:	veiled
ignoran:	they ignore
hallarse:	be
vitrinas:	showcases
dejé:	I left
llamáis:	you call
acuesto:	I lie down
divorcio.:	divorce.
esfuerzo:	effort
destino.:	destination.
tinta.:	ink.
admito:	I admit
Hago:	Do
minutos:	minutes
esto.:	this.
señaló:	pointed out
rebozo:	shawl
diálogo:	dialogue
salidos:	exited
encontró:	found
vanidad:	vanity
gravidez:	pregnancy
pasaron:	bird
libertad:	freedom
abierta:	open
edificante:	edifying
pueden:	they can
empiezan:	they start
papeles:	papers
Todas:	All
dolor.:	pain.
respiración:	breathing
asegurar:	ensure
puntos:	points
pasajes:	tickets
propiciatorio.:	propitiatory.
aullan:	howl
vida.:	life.
añadiendo:	adding
ancianos:	seniors
Aún:	Still
melismático:	melismatic
pureza:	Preza
dibujo:	drawing
Aquello:	That
corifeo:	coryphean
posibilidades:	possibilities
Treno.:	Train.
esbozos:	sketches
fórmulas:	formulas
curiosidad:	curiosity
lógica:	logic
haberle:	have him
efectos:	effects
armado:	armed
grasas:	fats
afirma:	states
pereza:	laziness
voz.:	voice.
—si:	-and
sabido:	known
señalado:	indicated
comunidad:	community
acuerdos:	agreements
Indios:	Indians
Capitán:	Captain
señala:	points out
dejaron:	they left
regresado:	returned
sordo:	deaf
demiurgo:	demiurge
amenaza:	threat
dificultad:	difficulty
dios:	God
inquieto:	restless
conduce:	lead
descender:	descend
solución:	solution
esteras:	mats
quebrado:	broken
ellas:	they
treno:	train
mágico:	magical
prácticas:	practices
Veo:	I see
abrir:	open
renuncia:	resignation
quiera:	want
medido:	measured
edificación:	building
cubre:	covers
bulle:	bulls
atando:	tying
Diluvio:	Flood
usando:	using
indudable:	doubtless
fieras:	beasts
enfermedades:	diseases
Terrenal:	Earthly
Paraíso:	Paradise
interesa:	interest
abandonado:	abandoned
percutiente:	striking
frascos:	jars
encierran:	enclose
hallaron:	they found
misiones:	missions
duermen:	they sleep
halló:	found
tinta:	ink
llamo:	called
peligros:	dangers
advierte:	warns
acuden:	they come
También:	Also
almacén:	store
viviendas:	housing
curso:	course
Henoch:	Enoch
traerá:	will bring
tristeza:	sadness
cimas:	tops
últimas:	latest
ecos:	echoes
presenta:	presents
palmos:	spans
subterráneo:	underground
confusa:	confused
Hechicero:	Sorcerer
presión:	pressure
bocas:	mouths
horribles:	horrible
inutilidad:	futility
anteriores:	previous
andan:	from the moment
Adán:	Adam
Génesis.:	Genesis.
«el:	"he
recompensa:	reward
salud:	health
comarcas:	regions
Adelantado.:	Advanced.
desaforada:	unbridled
viajar:	travel
Que:	What
prestos:	ready
Conquista:	Conquest
Libros:	Books
contemplando:	contemplating
tus:	the
«Hijo:	"Son
ornamentos:	ornaments
mío.:	mine.
sonajeras:	rattles
Pensando:	Thinking
años.:	years.
perfiles:	profiles
vientres:	bellies
relatos:	reports
sometida:	subdued
Comprendí:	I understood
rodeada:	surrounded
madres:	mothers
interpretación:	interpretation
nieblas:	fogs
prohibido:	forbidden
suelo.:	floor.
embriaguez:	drunkenness
llaman:	they call
aldea:	village
duermo:	I sleep
acorde:	chord
tormenta:	storm
nacido:	born
incapaz:	unable
pluralidad:	plurality
silueta:	silhouette
acrece:	increases
costado:	side
excluye:	excludes
cumple:	meets
ejemplos:	examples
Creación:	Creation
acabará:	will end
atribuye:	attributes
detenido:	arrested
separación:	separation
hechas:	made
Tampoco:	Neither
Hasta:	Until
vertiginoso:	vertiginous
palmo:	palm
pensamientos:	thoughts
distinto:	distinct
techumbres:	roofing
azufre:	sulfur
yacer:	lie
abajo.:	below.
musgos:	mosses
garzas:	herons
llenas:	full
retroceso:	recoil
nocturnos:	nocturnal
vieron:	they saw
copas:	glasses
colores:	colors
transforma:	transform
igualmente:	also
llevado:	carried
cobre:	copper
Alguien:	Someone
laja:	intervene
estanque:	pond
embate:	clash
arañas:	spiders
trataba:	tried
crepúsculo.:	dusk.
miedo.:	fear.
suelo;:	floor;
extraviados:	lost
atravesado:	crossed
moscas:	flies
eterno:	eternal
dejaban:	they left
socavones:	sinkholes
encendían:	they lit
puntiagudo:	pointed
letras:	lyrics
valladar:	fence
confesión:	confession
bambúes:	bamboos
CAPITULO:	CHAPTER
bordas:	edges
desciende:	descends
impar:	odd
incluye:	includes
cubierto:	covered
canoas:	canoes
vienen:	they come
sueña:	sounds
inútiles:	useless
ignorar:	ignore
página:	page
buscan:	search
tránsitos:	transits
largos:	long
moteadas:	speckled
consigo:	with you
hato:	there
acerco:	approach
dándome:	giving me
condición:	condition
reposo:	repose
excusa:	excuse
cerrando:	closing
sucios:	dirty
importa:	matter
rodado:	wheeled
buscamos:	we seek
apremio.:	pressure.
volvemos:	we return
rápido:	fast
entregado:	delivered
canteros:	stonemasons
guarda:	guard
cariño:	dear
hábil:	skillful
aproxima:	approaches
muere:	die
mañana.:	tomorrow.
llevarse:	take away
tendría:	would have
renunciar:	give up
marido:	husband
trágica:	tragic
escenario:	scenery
estimación:	estimate
sacado:	taken
cercanía:	closeness
desconocido:	a stranger
paludismo:	malaria
experiencia:	experience
furia:	rage
reacción:	reaction
dientes:	teeth
jicaras:	jikaras
carroña:	carrion
vínculo:	bond
viendo:	seeing
inhabitual:	unusual
diciendo:	saying
motivo:	reason
Está:	This
suelta:	loose
empellón:	shove
ropa:	clothes
Pregunto:	Asked
hallazgo:	find
cavado:	dug
seguramente:	surely
serpiente:	snake
millares:	thousands
hubiesen:	they would have
pinturas:	paintings
migración:	migration
Reino:	Kingdom
soldados:	soldiers
Hidra:	Hydra
fecha:	date
ennegrecido:	blackened
esqueleto:	skeleton
girar:	spin
llamados:	called
inmediato:	immediate
precioso:	precious
extrañas:	strange
inmenso:	immense
telúrica:	telluric
laboratorio:	laboratory
escucha:	listen
Habla:	Speaks
Herborizador:	Herbalizer
estrellas:	stars
ancha:	much
queja:	complaint
renacer:	be reborn
Polifemo:	Polyphemus
arrodillado:	kneeling
espesura:	thickness
cobran:	they charge
herbarios:	herbal
quinina:	quinine
pretende:	intend
colecciones:	collections
conozco:	know
virtud:	virtue
hoja:	move
sirven:	serve
deleitosa:	delightful
acunado:	cradled
regazo:	lap
enojado:	angry
ocurrir:	occur
puñados:	handfuls
creada:	created
conocidos:	acquaintances
inmovilidad:	immobility
templos:	temples
monolitos:	monoliths
gigantesca:	gigantic
saurios:	saurians
bloques:	blocks
permanecer:	remain
mayores:	older
primitivo:	primitive
grato:	grateful
sumamente:	extremely
abandonar:	abandon
trecho:	excerpt
aprovechar:	leverage
discurso:	speech
salvajes:	wild
despecho:	spite
angosto:	narrow
raudal:	torrent
explicar:	explain
desafiante:	challenging
viviendo:	living
encontraba:	found
albergue:	hostel
hagiografía:	hagiography
leyendas:	legends
problemas:	problems
presentes:	gifts
cobraban:	they charged
pegado:	glued
tramo:	section
cañas:	white hair
Dentro:	Within
bajos:	bass
migraciones:	migrations
rincón:	corner
haría:	would
novedad:	novelty
vertiginosa:	vertiginous
miríadas:	myriads
amante.:	lover.
voces.:	you.
estrecha:	narrow
bordes:	edges
codos:	elbows
fiebre:	fever
leña:	firewood
mujeres.:	women.
cumplido:	compliment
fríos:	cold
ponen:	they put
burlar:	cheat
imposibles:	impossible
realmente:	really
nueve:	nine
pensé:	think
abrazó:	hug
llanto:	crying
sobrecogedora:	overwhelming
apretado:	tight
acababan:	they finished
olas:	eggs
repetición:	repetition
lirios:	lilies
traídos:	brought
mordidos:	bitten
terciopelos:	velvets
profundos:	deep
vastas:	answered
cirios:	candles
pompas:	pomp
muerte.:	death.
trabajando:	working
Porvenir.:	Future.
Recuerdos:	Memories
enseña:	teaches
sabor:	flavor
cráneo:	skull
tocara:	will touch
elogios:	compliments
herborizador:	herbalizer
singulares:	singular
población.:	population.
cuantos:	how many
telas:	screens
éstos:	these
opinión:	opinion
Pescador:	Fisherman
común.:	common.
pluma:	feather
agarrar:	grab
cosas.:	things.
código:	code
hojarasca:	leaf litter
escalinata:	staircase
civilizaciones:	civilizations
Anunciación.:	Annunciation.
hombrecito:	little man
ladridos:	barking
guerreros:	warriors
fango:	mud
palabras.:	words.
corriendo:	in a hurry
tuvo:	had
rencores:	grudges
necesitaba:	I needed
vez.:	time.
levantaba:	lifted
empeño:	endeavor
atenta:	attentive
Ese:	That
llegando:	arriving
cumplir:	achieve
cubrir:	cover
tradiciones:	traditions
viejas:	old
guitarra:	guitar
territorios:	territories
poblado:	populated
imágenes:	images
tomando:	taking
fatiga:	fatigue
uñas:	nails
barniz:	varnish
inteligentes:	smart
relumbre:	glare
despecho.:	spite.
ceño:	frown
maligna:	malignant
entender:	to understand
constantemente:	constantly
útiles:	useful
plateados:	silver
aparecer:	to appear
sujeto:	subject
lodo:	official
habitaciones:	rooms
aullidos:	howls
barcas:	boats
Prometeo:	Prometheus
nariz:	nose
poderes:	powers
términos:	terms
caídos:	fallen
ocultaba:	hid
Ahí:	There
comprendí:	I understood
vegetaciones:	vegetations
próxima:	next
reflexiones:	reflections
posibles:	possible
frondas:	fronds
entradas:	entries
desconcertante:	disconcerting
desprendía:	gave off
hastiado:	jaded
árbol.:	tree.
laberintos:	labyrinths
piezas:	parts
fantástico:	fantastic
imaginar:	imagine
fantasmal:	ghostly
dieron:	they gave
Aquellos:	Those
techos:	roofs
punteadores:	pointers
sentencioso:	sententious
encender:	light
levantado:	up
Entonces:	So
raído:	raido
brotado:	sprouted
llevaban:	they carried
incienso:	incense
llegaron:	they arrived
afición:	hubby
paños:	cloths
danzantes:	dancers
yeso:	and so
esquina:	corner
contrafuertes:	buttresses
paredones:	walls
corredores:	runners
rincones:	corners
encarnado:	red
baldosas:	tiles
principio:	principle
escaleras:	stairs
cornisa:	cornice
restos:	remains
tejados:	roofs
reducidas:	reduced
podridas:	rotten
calles:	streets
Eran:	Were
ruinas.:	ruins.
manejo:	management
particularmente:	particularly
Aguinaldos:	bonuses
mapas:	maps
escala:	scale
máquina:	machine
quedo:	stay
montado:	mounted
bronce:	bronze
penetraba:	penetrated
ponían:	they put
técnicas:	techniques
cueros:	leathers
zapatos:	shoes
pista:	track
cantan:	they sing
ademán:	gesture
llego:	arrive
finjo:	I pretend
reglas:	rules
exige:	demands
temo:	theme
comiendo:	eating
traído:	brought
próximo:	next
reunirse:	meet up
adolescente:	adolescent
bañando:	bathing
consideran:	consider
sonríe:	smile
poniendo:	putting
molesta:	bothers
colgada:	hung
cesta:	way
regresa:	come back
campesino:	peasant
cantando:	singing
lona:	his
bordo:	edge
descubrimiento:	discovery
humanas:	human
comienza:	starts
vertiente:	slope
Donde:	Where
siglos.:	ages.
relación:	relationship
riberas:	banks
pulso:	pulse
himno:	hymn
inmóvil:	still
erguida:	erected
detiene:	stops
estará:	will be
cuán:	how
zumbido:	tinnitus
pesados:	heavy
lejanía:	remoteness
entera:	whole
leve:	live
inmensa:	immense
contemplo:	I contemplate
creación:	creation
fragor:	roar
sentado:	sitting
mide:	stomach
Sé:	See
fardo:	burden
Creo:	Believe
estábamos:	we were
diapasón:	diapason
frescor:	freshness
enrojecida:	flushed
velos:	fleeces
surgían:	arose
mascarón:	mask
barcos:	boats
cementerio:	cemetery
—un:	— and
leguas:	leagues
descenso:	descent
oído:	ear
fresca:	fresh
corrientes:	currents
masa:	time
llegamos:	we arrived
perdía:	lost
llevó:	he took
insinuante:	insinuating
colgaba:	hung
exigencias:	demands
enseñado:	taught
mías.:	mine
razones:	reasons
creencias:	beliefs
alzaban:	raised
factura:	bill
muslos:	thighs
acercábamos:	we were approaching
constantes:	constants
termina:	ends
tornaba:	returned
vencido:	won
Escrituras:	Scriptures
contrario:	contrary
frase:	phrase
pelear:	fight
oportuna:	timely
transformado:	transformed
brumas:	mists
marineros:	sailors
percance:	mishap
sonrisa:	smile
gravedad:	gravity
calificaba:	qualified
reto:	challenge
estuve:	I have been
empaque:	packing
presa:	taken
interesante:	interesting
enfermo:	sick
carácter:	character
metida:	stuck up
«La:	"The
paño:	cloth
excitación:	excitement
hecho.:	made.
avergonzado:	ashamed
puños:	cuffs
anchura:	width
preso:	taken 
adversario:	adversary
vacías:	empty
habitación.:	room.
gastado:	spent
queriendo:	wanting
bancos:	banks
salía:	went out
indiferente:	indifferent
observar:	notice
humores:	moods
sacar:	withdraw
errantes:	wanderers
cargando:	charging
posadero:	innkeeper
cuartos:	quarters
campanarios:	bell towers
viajaban:	they were traveling
patrón:	pattern
espanto:	astonishment
oscuros:	dark
producía:	produced
suspenso:	suspended
coladas:	glued
quitado:	taken
comedor:	dining room
cochinos:	pigs
ganas:	desire
volante:	steering wheel
castigo:	punishment
ardiente:	burning
corta:	short
llanura:	plain
nacida:	born
veían:	they saw
castillos:	castles
historia.:	history.
cerraba:	closed
alcanzado:	reached
contaba:	counted
leyendo:	reading
páginas:	pages
entera.:	whole.
sintiendo:	feeling
considerar:	consider
sucias:	dirty
—por:	-by
ironía:	irony
dándose:	giving
burla:	derision
vías:	ways
físico:	physical
continencia:	continence
triste:	sad
agobiado:	overwhelmed
Historia:	History
gruta:	cave
abrazada:	hugged
portada:	front page
escorias:	slag
rompió:	broke
abriéndose:	opening
enredaderas:	vines
siguiendo:	following
escasa:	scarce
greñas:	shock
mostraba:	showed
duro:	stand
recoge:	collect
verdor:	greenery
demasiado.:	too much.
Hombre:	Man
entró:	entered
camastro:	bunk bed
inconsciencia:	unconsciousness
textos:	texts
mentían:	they lied
licor:	liqueur
llega:	arrives
prensa:	press
ciento:	hundred
fusil:	gun
crece:	grows
Curador.:	Curator.
apuntes:	notes
aturdimiento:	daze
escribir.:	write.
componer:	compose
adolescencia:	adolescence
escena:	scene
público:	public
acentos:	accents
melodía:	melody
composición:	composition
torna:	returns
pensar.:	think.
Perteneciente:	Belonging
de...:	of...
pregunto:	asked
Cuaderno:	Notebook
suprema:	supreme
mazorcas:	cobs
marcado:	marked
estudio:	study
preciso:	necessary
empeñado:	pawned
tema:	him
paredón:	wall
siguen:	they continue
viven:	they live
haga:	do
contorno:	contour
tuve:	I had
música.:	music.
acepta:	accept
ésta:	this
Gobierno:	Government
detengo:	I stop
crear:	create
posee:	owns
cazador:	hunter
enunciado:	statement
tratar:	treat
dedo:	finger
planchas:	irons
huesos:	bones
recursos:	resources
larvas:	larvae
tercera:	third
oscuro:	dark
días.:	days.
arranca:	starts
seguro:	insurance
fechas:	dates
funciones:	functions
Edad:	Age
asentado:	settled
quisiera:	I'd like
desarrollo:	development
arrugado:	wrinkled
fueran:	were
buscaba:	I was looking for
metidos:	stuck up
tensión:	strain
sinfonía:	symphony
agarra:	grab
llamar:	call
pregunta:	ask
distintas:	distinct
repente:	suddenly
hervor:	out
alfombra:	rug
penumbras:	shadows
maderas:	woods
muertas:	dead
naves:	ships
espantos:	frights
milenios:	millennia
milenaria:	millennial
hermoso:	beautiful
orgullo:	pride
—una:	-a
vueltas:	turns
apariencias:	appearances
fondos:	funds
corteza:	crust
vamos:	let's go
sabores:	flavors
serán:	will be
dueños:	owners
abrazamos:	we hug
llevo:	he took
indios.:	Indians.
remeros:	rowers
ofrecido:	offered
desnudo:	naked
danta:	interest
tenga:	have
remos:	oars
Océano:	Ocean
manantiales:	springs
capaz:	able
confesar:	confess
agujas:	needles
acaban:	end
cierra:	close
cuelga:	hanging
vuelven:	they come back
cabaña:	cabin
contento:	happy
ansioso:	anxious
recuerdan:	remember
oportunidad:	chance
oigo:	I hear
queda:	is left over
Comprendo:	Understand
hormigas:	ants
perder:	lose
fidelidad:	fidelity
silencio.:	silence.
Nunca:	Never
palabra.:	word.
golpea:	hits
alcanza:	reaches
desnudez:	nakedness
selvas:	jungles
gema:	echo
torrente:	torrent
buscadores:	search engines
figuraciones:	figurations
trazados:	traces
Dioses:	Gods
afán:	eagerness
orejas:	ears
olivo:	olive tree
traspasado:	transferred
estupor:	stupor
barbas:	barbs
zona:	area
cascadas:	waterfalls
macizo:	solid
vasta:	only
reflejo:	reflection
pinta:	surface
erguidos:	erected
cipos:	cipes
húmedas:	wet
hábito:	habit
traen:	they bring
explica:	explains
cuchillo:	knife
respuesta:	answer
cuento:	tale
somos:	we are
—de:	-of
cabras:	goats
vivienda:	dwelling
portentosos:	portentous
arrojar:	throw
—en:	-in
sucedido:	happened
geometría:	geometry
arquitectura:	architecture
dejando:	leaving
derribados:	knocked down
pedirle:	ask
asiento:	seat
fácil:	easy
oír:	hear
hermanos:	siblings
perdón:	sorry
verdadero:	TRUE
volando:	flying
semana:	week
tremendo:	tremendous
continente:	continent
puso:	heart
tinaja:	jar
Mientras:	While
cerebro:	brain
apacible:	gentle
adentro:	inside
hallaba:	found
acercó:	approached
dan:	And
angustia:	distress
portentosa:	portentous
terribles:	terrible
rostros:	faces
sabían:	they knew
sollozos:	sobs
vivido:	vivid
avellanado:	countersunk
seguidos:	followed
hueso:	bone
primitivos:	primitives
maleza:	evil
muralla:	wall
petroglifos:	petroglyphs
caverna:	cave
bejucos:	vines
dónde:	where
Noé:	Noah
ponía:	put
horas.:	hours.
olvidada:	forgotten
amarla:	love her
verla:	see it
rodeado:	surrounded
alzando:	raising
habló:	speak
suma:	addition
fibra:	fiber
inmensos:	immense
cabecera:	head
grandeza:	greatness
evasión:	evasion
recordaba:	I remembered
raras:	rare
divertido:	fun
farmacia:	pharmacy
admitir:	admit
Dos:	Of the
aspecto:	aspect
hacían:	they did
alboroto:	riot
hundía:	sank
desconocida:	unknown
relato:	report
costumbre:	habit
explicó:	explained
árboles.:	trees.
quedé:	I stayed
estrépito:	crash
salidas:	Departures
hocico:	snout
jefe:	boss
catedral:	cathedral
tambores:	drums
revelar:	reveal
lápiz:	pencil
órgano:	organ
puertas:	doors
prodigiosa:	prodigious
salvar:	save
llevada:	carried
Mundo:	World
entrar:	to enter
mármol:	marble
juegos:	games
dueño:	owner
pintado:	painted
sonido:	sound
sienes:	temples
resulta:	result
imagino:	I imagine
temor:	fear
pienso:	I think
puedan:	can
tosco:	Tuscan
creen:	believe
probar:	prove
vestida:	dressed
buscador:	seeker
aquí.:	here.
hembras:	females
oculta:	hidden
Vuelvo:	I'm back
partes.:	parties.
reír:	laugh
vocación:	vocation
casos:	cases
hijos:	children
derecha:	right
señalaba:	pointed out
autor:	author
largas:	long
prisa:	hurry
Muy:	Very
inútil:	useless
descansan:	they rest
inmóviles:	motionless
planeta:	planet
nosotros.:	us.
parecer:	opinion
agudo:	sharp
marcha:	march
antiguo:	ancient
remanso:	backwater
venidos:	come
cauce:	channel
torrentes:	torrents
situación:	situation
familia:	family
países:	countries
disposición:	provision
formación:	training
nociones:	notions
cuidado:	Careful
dignidad:	dignity
decía:	said
unidad:	unit
Entre:	Between
tremendamente:	tremendously
relaciones:	relations
sentí:	I felt
hembra:	female
oscura:	dark
miré:	Look
Tenía:	Had
lugares:	places
actitud:	attitude
iniciar:	start
llenado:	fill
cintura:	waist
olvidados:	forgotten
Diamantes:	Diamonds
título:	title
cólera:	anger
cuarto:	room
arrojó:	daring
recibir:	receive
adonde:	where to
huyendo:	fleeing
explicación:	explanation
decirme:	tell me
estilo:	style
encienden:	turn on
hicieran:	they did
fieles:	faithful
seguían:	they followed
prostitutas:	prostitutes
reflejaban:	they reflected
volvieron:	they came back
máscaras:	masks
hablaban:	they spoke
pájaro:	bird
Junto:	Together
hincada:	kneeling
mecían:	rocked
bailar:	dance
espectáculo:	show
referencia:	reference
vastedad:	vastness
salimos:	we go out
mismo.:	same.
pintores:	painters
traje:	lasts
Brabante:	Brabant
ojos.:	eyes.
volvió:	came back
hacerla:	do it
dije:	said
episodio:	episode
pasaba:	was passing
volvía:	came back
hubiese:	would have
tratando:	treating
cuentos:	stories
deleite:	treat
bestias:	beasts
propios:	own
guardar:	keep
literatura:	literature
parecido:	similar
pieles:	skins
cristales:	crystals
aparecían:	appeared
rodeados:	surrounded
dejo:	let
solicitud:	application
bastaba:	it was enough
cercana:	close
llegó:	arrive
Durante:	During
rompe:	breaks
partitura:	score
antemano:	beforehand
caballos:	horses
dejándome:	leaving me
principios:	beginning
crecía:	grew
divorcio:	divorce
todo.:	all.
tratado:	treated
escribir:	write
elemento:	element
extraviado:	lost
aparición:	appearance
intento:	tried
empezar:	begin
destinado:	intended
Pienso:	I think
creo:	believe
mazorca:	cob
mozo:	guy
fundado:	founded
siete:	seven
dibujado:	drawn
hayan:	have
gentes:	people
comprender:	grasp
matriz:	headquarters
dejar:	leave
existe:	exists
alguno:	some
danzas:	dances
transcurre:	passes
—el:	-he
revelación:	revelation
tempestad:	storm
instrumento:	instrument
planos:	plans
Formas:	Shapes
demora:	delay
cuerdas:	ropes
ritmos:	rhythms
consistencia:	consistency
inmensas:	immense
rayo:	ray
lejanías:	distances
tinieblas:	darkness
alcance:	range
bajar:	lower
arrojado:	thrown
llevar:	carry
Conquistadores:	Pathfinders
trata:	treats
abre:	open
destino:	destination
peces:	pieces
poca:	little
oídos:	ears
impaciente:	impatient
alivio:	relief
valores:	values
inesperada:	unexpected
instinto:	instinct
dudas:	doubts
siente:	feel
Antes:	Before
conocer:	know
hacerlo:	do it
escrito:	written
monumentos:	monuments
hombres.:	men.
Mesetas:	Plateaus
hogar:	home
cantar:	sing
aparece:	appears
lengua:	language
estamos:	we are
conoce:	know
vocablos:	words
noticias:	news
añade:	duck
levantar:	lift
dicho:	saying
fija:	fixed
distintos:	distinct
revela:	reveals
importancia:	importance
granito:	granite
alegría:	happiness
estuviera:	was
cabezas:	heads
aparecen:	appear
impaciencia:	impatience
concepto:	concept
primero:	first
emprende:	undertake
oscuras:	dark
hicieron:	they did
—pues:	-well
hijas:	daughters
Frente:	Forehead
rito:	here
tumba:	grave
grito:	shout
echar:	throw
te:	the
contemplar:	contemplate
vivía:	lived
rápidamente:	quickly
trueno:	thunder
veinte:	twenty
seguido:	followed
extraña:	strange
plumas:	feathers
cortezas:	crusts
Sólo:	Only
cayó:	fell
debió:	should have
día.:	day.
—que:	-what
encuentros:	meetings
firme:	firm
compañero:	buddy
obeliscos:	obelisks
distinta:	different
caños:	pipes
carga:	load
misionero:	missionary
pudo:	could
más.:	further.
luminarias:	luminaries
imagen:	image
Detrás:	Behind
cubiertos:	covered
flautas:	flutes
concierto:	concert
umbrales:	thresholds
seguía:	continued
hondamente:	deeply
misteriosa:	mysterious
bestia:	beast
Caballo:	Horse
deber:	duty
ridículo:	ridiculous
trato:	deal
luto:	cooked
amante:	lover
Este:	It is
echa:	cast
atrás.:	back.
entra:	enter
gigantescos:	gigantic
trajo:	brought
brisa:	breeze
hará:	will do
venido:	come
perenne:	perennial
dejados:	left
tuviera:	had
peso:	weight
empuje:	push
andanzas:	wanderings
creer:	believe
terreno:	land
noción:	notion
ignorados:	ignored
común:	common
ajeno:	unaffiliated
distancias:	distances
creyendo:	believing
precisamente:	precisely
taberna:	bar
Apenas:	Just
irónica:	ironic
exasperante:	infuriating
decisión:	decision
Buscador:	Seeker
ocurrido:	occurred
nerviosa:	nervous
seguida:	followed
dejó:	let
llamaba:	called
Estaba:	Was
comenzó:	began
víspera:	eve
proximidad:	proximity
recoger:	collect
asombraba:	astonished
aquellas:	those
vigas:	beams
llevando:	carrying
corrían:	they ran
daban:	different
botellas:	bottles
Todos:	All
amarillas:	yellow
población:	population
oscuridad:	darkness
Hubo:	Was
personajes:	characters
caza:	hunting
ignora:	ignore
simples:	simple
profunda:	deep
posible.:	possible.
tanta:	so much
pequeño:	little
sucesión:	succession
pareja:	couple
miraba:	looked
capítulo:	chapter
lectura:	reading
abiertas:	open
ventanas:	windows
ahora—:	now-
preguntas:	questions
espejos:	mirrors
malos:	bad
sorprendente:	surprising
Parecía:	It seemed
lecho:	litter
secas:	dried
momentos:	moments
dejaba:	left
beber:	to drink
entendimiento:	understanding
enana:	dwarf
hallado:	found
piloto:	pilot
mía:	tight
poema:	poem
signo:	sign
olvidar:	forget
remedios:	remedies
maíz:	corn
escritura:	writing
asombro:	astonishment
rescate:	rescue
jarra:	jug
dioses:	gods
hamacas:	hammocks
nivel:	level
lados:	sides
comprendo:	understand
enojo:	anger
serpientes:	snakes
notas:	notes
hacerme:	make me
segunda:	second
cuestión:	question
posesión:	possession
habrán:	there will be
levanta:	get up
columnas:	columns
montaña:	mountain
venas:	is coming
Allá:	There
causa:	cause
única:	unique
cuales:	which
ofrece:	offers
arroja:	throws
futuro:	future
existencia:	existence
sabe:	he knows
mesetas:	plateaus
Cada:	Each
invención:	invention
hallada:	found
morir:	to die
siglo:	century
—la:	-the
imaginación:	imagination
hoguera:	bonfire
lunes:	Monday
muestra:	sample
alcanzar:	reach
encontrado:	found
espesa:	thick
término:	term
poner:	put
saben:	per
olvidado:	forgotten
espesas:	thick
hermanas:	sisters
garganta:	throat
Dios:	God
jornadas:	days
cautivos:	captives
yacimiento:	deposit
personaje:	character
ligero:	light
naturales:	natural
enseres:	equipment
cincuenta:	fifty
entero:	whole
frío:	cold
tipo:	type
acabando:	running out
allá.:	there.
generación:	generation
pequeños:	small
significado:	meaning
fuga:	leak
partida:	match
constante:	constant
caídas:	falls
Bajo:	Low
última:	last
época:	era
descanso:	rest
ritos:	rites
derecho:	right
empresa:	enterprise
peligro:	danger
Perro:	Dog
rumbos:	directions
mitos:	myth
rotas:	routes
maravilloso:	marvelous
plagas:	pests
roto:	inside
terciopelo:	velvet
diablos:	devils
nube:	cloud
extraños:	strangers
garfios:	hooks
vacío:	empty
hiciera:	did
enorme:	huge
resultaba:	it turned out
clavos:	nails
cuero:	leather
sudor:	sweat
puesta:	putting
habré:	there will be
claro:	Of course
propias:	own
bastante:	quite
querido:	darling
conocen:	they know
llorar:	cry
viajes:	trips
mirando:	looking
raudales:	rapids
vuelvo:	I'm back
aleja:	move away
menudo:	slight
pesar:	weigh
elementos:	elements
empezó:	started
senos:	old
viejos:	old
mundo.:	world.
centenares:	hundreds
fría:	cold
redondez:	roundness
podían:	they could
quise:	I wanted
prostituta:	prostitute
salido:	left
tremenda:	tremendous
botella:	bottle
conocía:	knew
efecto:	effect
rodillas:	knees
fui:	I went
acercarse:	approach
rumbo:	course
vestidos:	dresses
pelo:	for the
humo:	in it
trabajo:	job
distancia:	distance
viento:	wind
Sobre:	On
arrojando:	throwing
dicen:	they say
situado:	situated
ausencia:	absence
novela:	novel
cerrada:	closed
riendo:	laughing
caída:	drop
preguntándome:	wondering
ajena:	alien
acabar:	end
profundo:	deep
proceso:	process
orquesta:	orchestra
orden:	order
prueba:	proof
falta:	lack
sentir:	to feel
obras:	works
Estoy:	I'm
acabo:	just
deben:	they must
estos:	these
Mesetas.:	Plateaus.
confusión:	confusion
varón:	male
naturaleza:	nature
pensado:	thought
bastón:	cane
inacabable:	unending
evidente:	obvious
función:	function
acaba:	ends
tiempo.:	time.
curiara:	court
piel:	fur
sorpresa:	surprise
ánimo:	cheer up
rodea:	surrounds
envuelto:	wrapped
izquierda:	left
tragedia:	tragedy
entrañas:	bowels
mariposas:	butterflies
cascada:	waterfall
violencia:	violence
pequeñas:	small
musicales:	musicals
partir:	leave
visión:	vision
amarillo:	yellow
abiertos:	open
misión:	mission
patas:	paws
signos:	signs
nuevas:	new
crepúsculo:	dusk
antiguos:	ancient
compañía:	company
niños:	children
blancas:	white
arcos:	bows
hombre.:	man.
caballo:	horse
esperar:	wait
pocos:	few
cien:	hundred
islas:	islands
vuelo:	flight
da:	and
Sus:	Their
quedado:	left
Si:	And
mío:	mine
recordar:	remember
cultura:	culture
modos:	modes
razón:	reason
hallé:	I found
interés:	interest
pecho:	chest
cercano:	nearby
verdadera:	true
espejo:	mirror
probablemente:	probably
conversación:	conversation
pensaba:	thought
ayuda:	aid
cuello:	neck
estado:	state
hallando:	finding
extremo:	extreme
imposible:	impossible
libro:	book
vegetación:	vegetation
Esta:	This
hombro:	shoulder
gestos:	gestures
conocido:	acquaintance
labios:	lips
desorden:	disorder
habitación:	room
cuentas:	accounts
fuerte:	strong
colgados:	hung
acá:	here
júbilo:	jubilation
periódico:	newspaper
uso:	use
salen:	the hall
Más:	Further
pasa:	happens
Odisea:	Odyssey
existencia.:	existence.
yerbas:	herbs
alguien:	someone
siglos:	ages
remoto:	remote
Estamos:	We are
pide:	ask
Todo:	All
difícil:	difficult
acaso:	chance
amanecer:	sunrise
dolor:	pain
dedos:	fingers
cadáver:	corpse
primeras:	first
además:	besides
lajas:	slabs
belleza:	beauty
tomar:	take
noche.:	evening.
atrás:	back
insectos:	insects
diamantes:	diamonds
sonoridad:	sonority
caras:	guys
Curador:	Curator
figuras:	figures
hongos:	fungus
abierto:	open
oficios:	crafts
dando:	giving
Tierras:	Land
conmigo:	with me
nadie:	nobody
viaje.:	journey.
ocurre:	occurs
ambos:	both
sigue:	go on
mismos:	themselves
altura:	height
aquellos:	those
nuevos:	new
encuentra:	finds
llenos:	full
dinero:	money
único:	single
atención:	attention
habíamos:	we had
apareció:	appeared
esperaba:	I expected
afirmando:	stating
lentamente:	slowly
Allí:	Over there
haberse:	have
semanas:	weeks
venado:	deer
Así:	So
fuese:	was
llevaba:	wore
hombros:	shoulders
mente:	mind
verme:	don't give
eso:	that
rodar:	rotate
perdido:	lost
quiero:	wanna
será:	it will be
puedo:	I can
digo:	I say
propia:	own
habrá:	there will be
tarea:	task
necesario:	necessary
hemos:	we have
quiere:	wants
quedaba:	remained
empieza:	begin
hechos:	facts
griegos:	greeks
brazo:	arm
acto:	act
voluntad:	willpower
seguir:	follow
acción:	action
mí.:	my.
partes:	parts
noticia:	news
cuarenta:	forty
algunas:	some
encontrar:	find
cuatro:	four
trabajar:	work
templo:	temple
hijo:	son
misterio:	mystery
ámbito:	scope
sexo:	sex
medios:	media
pasos:	steps
centro:	center
sabiendo:	knowing
Nada:	Nothing
Desde:	From
voces:	you
sueño:	dream
proa:	bow
posible:	possible
parecían:	they seemed
mirar:	look
daba:	after
creciente:	growing
medida:	measure
propio:	own
hablaba:	spoke
caer:	fall
seres:	beings
menor:	smaller
joven:	young
pareció:	it seemed
sé:	see
grita:	scream
gritos:	shouting
poder:	can
mismas:	themselves
posibilidad:	possibility
tierras:	land
pensando:	thinking
libros:	books
prosa:	prose
mirada:	look
lleno:	full
mediodía:	average
lenguaje:	language
cabellera:	hair
estampa:	print
noches:	nights
último:	last
podido:	could
volver:	return
siquiera:	even
suena:	sounds
debo:	I must
siento:	I feel
segundo:	second
canoa:	canoe
leyes:	laws
borde:	should
espera:	wait
objetos:	objects
dijo:	said
fuerza:	force
animales:	animals
últimos:	last
junio):	June)
enormes:	huge
arte:	until
acento:	accent
larga:	long
capuchino:	cappuccino
absurdo:	absurd
hamaca:	hammock
Algo:	Something
emoción:	emotion
tengo:	I have
adelante:	forward
ruido:	noise
aquello:	that
vivir:	live
ahí:	there
vuelve:	comes back
figura:	figure
veía:	saw
dar:	but
sentía:	felt
buscando:	searching
mineros:	miners
buen:	good
acababa:	ended
Además:	Besides
golpe:	blow
nombres:	names
Había:	There was
perfil:	profile
tenido:	had
comienzo:	beginning
celo:	even
juego:	game
especie:	species
claridad:	clarity
caído:	fallen
llamado:	called
propósito:	purpose
Simón:	Simon
avión:	plane
Treno:	Train
señal:	sign
vientre:	belly
Grandes:	Big
lleva:	carry
nuestros:	our
muerto:	dead
podría:	could
Gavilán:	Hawk
montañas:	mountains
Como:	As
perros:	dogs
memoria:	memory
ruinas:	ruins
correr:	run
brazos:	arms
raíces:	roots
quería:	wanted to
muchos:	many
piernas:	legs
meses:	months
pueda:	can
oficio:	job
cuenta:	account
espacio:	space
lluvias:	rains
otras:	others
tantas:	so many
formas:	shapes
paisaje:	landscape
sabía:	knew
semejante:	such
espaldas:	backs
ríos:	rivers
caminos:	roads
ropas:	clothes
tronco:	stem
luces:	lights
vasto:	vast
país:	country
encima:	on
movimiento:	motion
podía:	could
pudiera:	could
espíritu:	spirit
cuerpos:	bodies
cubierta:	deck
Aquí:	Here
jornada:	day
Venados:	Deer
jamás:	never
texto:	text
responde:	respond
viene:	he comes
forma:	shape
caño:	spout
según:	according to
perro:	dog
recuerdo:	memory
cierto:	TRUE
techo:	ceiling
vuelto:	turned
Porque:	Why
ciudades:	cities
Esto:	This
llena:	full
haciendo:	doing
semejantes:	similar
parecen:	they seem
salir:	go out
demás:	others
semblante:	countenance
minero:	miner
tono:	application
recién:	newly
orillas:	shores
varias:	several
hecha:	made
cierta:	true
rostro:	face
expresión:	expression
idioma:	language
—como:	-as
choza:	hut
calor:	heat
deseo:	desire
regreso:	return
ramas:	remaining
humedad:	humidity
fraile:	friar
sensación:	sensation
navegación:	navigation
objeto:	object
dado:	given
andar:	to walk
silencio:	silence
olor:	smell
peor:	worse
uno:	a
sería:	I would be
árbol:	tree
manera:	manner
ello:	it
hizo:	those
Su:	They are
después:	after
teatro:	theater
habla:	speaks
debe:	has to
secreto:	secret
hacen:	do
nubes:	clouds
muerte:	death
llegado:	arrived
llegar:	arrive
caso:	case
aguardiente:	schnapps
pasar:	market
año:	year
muchas:	many
negras:	black
debajo:	below
cualquier:	any
plantas:	plants
estoy:	I'm
conciencia:	awareness
troncos:	trunks
sombras:	shadows
varios:	several
corriente:	current
están:	are
tantos:	so many
decir:	say
instante:	instant
encuentro:	meeting
esposa:	wife
nuestro:	our
entrada:	Prohibited
pocas:	few
nuestras:	our
tras:	after
cerca:	fence
Le:	The
Para:	To
tiempos:	time
así:	So
cambio:	change
Ya:	Of
iba:	others
necesidad:	need
busca:	search
ellos:	they
haya:	these
pájaros:	birds
hora:	time
mientras:	while
Anunciación:	Annunciation
mejor:	better
tenían:	they had
tener:	have
pasado:	past
través:	through
cosa:	What
puesto:	position
Mónica:	Monica
tienen:	have
apenas:	just
acerca:	about
Luego:	Then
hallar:	cases
detrás:	behind
realidad:	reality
fondo:	bottom
gente:	people
qué:	that
hubieran:	they would have
historia:	history
presente:	gift
lluvia:	rain
buscar:	look for
aquella:	that
nombre:	name
nuestra:	our
fueron:	were
porque:	why
visto:	view
orilla:	bank
aunque:	although
primeros:	first
Un:	And
estaban:	were
lejos:	far
abajo:	below
unas:	nails
nuevamente:	again
bien:	GOOD
parte:	part
arriba:	above
obra:	work
estar:	be
verdad:	TRUE
ciertas:	certain
debía:	should
dejado:	left
cómo:	as
puede:	can
demasiado:	too much
griego:	Greek
estas:	is
punto:	point
torno:	lathe
hojas:	leaves
cabeza:	head
sentido:	sense
hablar:	talk
también:	also
nunca:	never
algunos:	some
ritmo:	rhythm
allí:	over there
ciertos:	some
viaje:	journey
instrumentos:	instruments
veo:	I see
esos:	those
miedo:	fear
hacía:	toward
momento:	moment
grandes:	big
entonces:	so
cuyas:	whose
súbito:	sudden
tarde:	afternoon
todavía:	still
mañana:	tomorrow
menos:	less
suelo:	floor
misma:	same
él:	he
regresar:	go back
horas:	hours
habían:	had
años:	years
primera:	first
cual:	which
presencia:	presence
sí:	Yeah
cuanto:	how much
papel:	paper
nosotros:	us
pensar:	think
palabra:	word
frente:	forehead
hacer:	do
les:	THE
quienes:	who
cuyos:	whose
casi:	almost
parecía:	it seemed
Una:	A
tanto:	both
dentro:	within
esas:	those
gesto:	gesture
toda:	all
han:	he
Por:	By
Ahora:	Now
cosas:	things
aquel:	that
mucho:	a lot
unos:	some
mano:	thousand
hecho:	made
palabras:	words
música:	music
otro:	other
parece:	it seems
vida:	life
otros:	others
lado:	side
cuyo:	whose
tres:	three
tiene:	has
fuera:	out
sólo:	only
tenía:	had
pues:	well
modo:	way
cuerpo:	body
voz:	voice
indios:	indians
alguna:	some
veces:	times
cuya:	whose
sido:	been
esto:	this
mujeres:	women
junto:	together
todas:	all
medio:	half
fue:	was
suerte:	luck
nada:	nothing
antes:	before
durante:	during
árboles:	trees
lugar:	place
algún:	some
De:	Of
está:	this
Cuando:	When
tal:	of
siempre:	always
allá:	there
mundo:	world
días:	days
aún:	still
otra:	other
día:	day
mismo:	same
mujer:	women
ese:	that
todos:	all
esta:	this
hubiera:	had
ni:	in
hasta:	until
poco:	bit
estaba:	was
noche:	evening
este:	it is
pero:	but
ojos:	eyes
cada:	each
desde:	from
hombres:	men
tiempo:	time
hace:	does
eran:	were
bajo:	low
luego:	then
hacia:	toward
Mouche:	Fly
quien:	who
hombre:	man
ser:	to be
dos:	of the
Adelantado:	Advanced
La:	The
muy:	very
mí:	my
aquí:	here
entre:	between
algo:	something
En:	In
ya:	of
si:	and
le:	the
ahora:	now
todo:	all
donde:	where
Pero:	But
El:	He
vez:	time
cuando:	when
había:	there was
sobre:	on
más:	further
sus:	their
para:	to
como:	as
su:	are
por:	by
del:	of the
se:	with
una:	a
un:	and
el:	he
en:	in
la:	the
que:	what
de:	of
